CHAPTER I In Chancery London .
Michaelmas term lately over , and the Lord Chancellor sitting in Lincoln 's Inn Hall .
Implacable November weather .
As much mud in the streets as if the waters had but newly retired from the face of the earth , and it would not be wonderful to meet a Megalosaurus , forty feet long or so , waddling like an elephantine lizard up Holborn Hill .
Smoke lowering down from chimney-pots , making a soft black drizzle , with flakes of soot in it as big as full-grown snowflakes -- gone into mourning , one might imagine , for the death of the sun .
Dogs , undistinguishable in mire .
Horses , scarcely better ; splashed to their very blinkers .
Foot passengers , jostling one another 's umbrellas in a general infection of ill temper , and losing their foot-hold at street-corners , where tens of thousands of other foot passengers have been slipping and sliding since the day broke ( if this day ever broke ) , adding new deposits to the crust upon crust of mud , sticking at those points tenaciously to the pavement , and accumulating at compound interest .
Fog everywhere .
Fog up the river , where it flows among green aits and meadows ; fog down the river , where it rolls defiled among the tiers of shipping and the waterside pollutions of a great ( and dirty ) city .
Fog on the Essex marshes , fog on the Kentish heights .
Fog creeping into the cabooses of collier-brigs ; fog lying out on the yards and hovering in the rigging of great ships ; fog drooping on the gunwales of barges and small boats .
Fog in the eyes and throats of ancient Greenwich pensioners , wheezing by the firesides of their wards ; fog in the stem and bowl of the afternoon pipe of the wrathful skipper , down in his close cabin ; fog cruelly pinching the toes and fingers of his shivering little ' prentice boy on deck .
Chance people on the bridges peeping over the parapets into a nether sky of fog , with fog all round them , as if they were up in a balloon and hanging in the misty clouds .
Gas looming through the fog in divers places in the streets , much as the sun may , from the spongey fields , be seen to loom by husbandman and ploughboy .
Most of the shops lighted two hours before their time -- as the gas seems to know , for it has a haggard and unwilling look .
The raw afternoon is rawest , and the dense fog is densest , and the muddy streets are muddiest near that leaden-headed old obstruction , appropriate ornament for the threshold of a leaden-headed old corporation , Temple Bar .
And hard by Temple Bar , in Lincoln 's Inn Hall , at the very heart of the fog , sits the Lord High Chancellor in his High Court of Chancery .
Never can there come fog too thick , never can there come mud and mire too deep , to assort with the groping and floundering condition which this High Court of Chancery , most pestilent of hoary sinners , holds this day in the sight of heaven and earth .
On such an afternoon , if ever , the Lord High Chancellor ought to be sitting here -- as here he is -- with a foggy glory round his head , softly fenced in with crimson cloth and curtains , addressed by a large advocate with great whiskers , a little voice , and an interminable brief , and outwardly directing his contemplation to the lantern in the roof , where he can see nothing but fog .
On such an afternoon some score of members of the High Court of Chancery bar ought to be -- as here they are -- mistily engaged in one of the ten thousand stages of an endless cause , tripping one another up on slippery precedents , groping knee-deep in technicalities , running their goat-hair and horsehair warded heads against walls of words and making a pretence of equity with serious faces , as players might .
On such an afternoon the various solicitors in the cause , some two or three of whom have inherited it from their fathers , who made a fortune by it , ought to be -- as are they not ?
-- ranged in a line , in a long matted well ( but you might look in vain for truth at the bottom of it ) between the registrar 's red table and the silk gowns , with bills , cross-bills , answers , rejoinders , injunctions , affidavits , issues , references to masters , masters ' reports , mountains of costly nonsense , piled before them .
Well may the court be dim , with wasting candles here and there ; well may the fog hang heavy in it , as if it would never get out ; well may the stained-glass windows lose their colour and admit no light of day into the place ; well may the uninitiated from the streets , who peep in through the glass panes in the door , be deterred from entrance by its owlish aspect and by the drawl , languidly echoing to the roof from the padded dais where the Lord High Chancellor looks into the lantern that has no light in it and where the attendant wigs are all stuck in a fog-bank !
This is the Court of Chancery , which has its decaying houses and its blighted lands in every shire , which has its worn-out lunatic in every madhouse and its dead in every churchyard , which has its ruined suitor with his slipshod heels and threadbare dress borrowing and begging through the round of every man 's acquaintance , which gives to monied might the means abundantly of wearying out the right , which so exhausts finances , patience , courage , hope , so overthrows the brain and breaks the heart , that there is not an honourable man among its practitioners who would not give -- who does not often give -- the warning , " Suffer any wrong that can be done you rather than come here ! "
Who happen to be in the Lord Chancellor 's court this murky afternoon besides the Lord Chancellor , the counsel in the cause , two or three counsel who are never in any cause , and the well of solicitors before mentioned ?
There is the registrar below the judge , in wig and gown ; and there are two or three maces , or petty-bags , or privy purses , or whatever they may be , in legal court suits .
These are all yawning , for no crumb of amusement ever falls from Jarndyce and Jarndyce ( the cause in hand ) , which was squeezed dry years upon years ago .
The short-hand writers , the reporters of the court , and the reporters of the newspapers invariably decamp with the rest of the regulars when Jarndyce and Jarndyce comes on .
Their places are a blank .
Standing on a seat at the side of the hall , the better to peer into the curtained sanctuary , is a little mad old woman in a squeezed bonnet who is always in court , from its sitting to its rising , and always expecting some incomprehensible judgment to be given in her favour .
Some say she really is , or was , a party to a suit , but no one knows for certain because no one cares .
She carries some small litter in a reticule which she calls her documents , principally consisting of paper matches and dry lavender .
A sallow prisoner has come up , in custody , for the half-dozenth time to make a personal application " to purge himself of his contempt , " which , being a solitary surviving executor who has fallen into a state of conglomeration about accounts of which it is not pretended that he had ever any knowledge , he is not at all likely ever to do .
In the meantime his prospects in life are ended .
Another ruined suitor , who periodically appears from Shropshire and breaks out into efforts to address the Chancellor at the close of the day 's business and who can by no means be made to understand that the Chancellor is legally ignorant of his existence after making it desolate for a quarter of a century , plants himself in a good place and keeps an eye on the judge , ready to call out " My Lord ! "
in a voice of sonorous complaint on the instant of his rising .
A few lawyers ' clerks and others who know this suitor by sight linger on the chance of his furnishing some fun and enlivening the dismal weather a little .
Jarndyce and Jarndyce drones on .
This scarecrow of a suit has , in course of time , become so complicated that no man alive knows what it means .
The parties to it understand it least , but it has been observed that no two Chancery lawyers can talk about it for five minutes without coming to a total disagreement as to all the premises .
Innumerable children have been born into the cause ; innumerable young people have married into it ; innumerable old people have died out of it .
Scores of persons have deliriously found themselves made parties in Jarndyce and Jarndyce without knowing how or why ; whole families have inherited legendary hatreds with the suit .
The little plaintiff or defendant who was promised a new rocking-horse when Jarndyce and Jarndyce should be settled has grown up , possessed himself of a real horse , and trotted away into the other world .
Fair wards of court have faded into mothers and grandmothers ; a long procession of Chancellors has come in and gone out ; the legion of bills in the suit have been transformed into mere bills of mortality ; there are not three Jarndyces left upon the earth perhaps since old Tom Jarndyce in despair blew his brains out at a coffee-house in Chancery Lane ; but Jarndyce and Jarndyce still drags its dreary length before the court , perennially hopeless .
Jarndyce and Jarndyce has passed into a joke .
That is the only good that has ever come of it .
It has been death to many , but it is a joke in the profession .
Every master in Chancery has had a reference out of it .
Every Chancellor was " in it , " for somebody or other , when he was counsel at the bar .
Good things have been said about it by blue-nosed , bulbous-shoed old benchers in select port-wine committee after dinner in hall .
Articled clerks have been in the habit of fleshing their legal wit upon it .
The last Lord Chancellor handled it neatly , when , correcting Mr. Blowers , the eminent silk gown who said that such a thing might happen when the sky rained potatoes , he observed , " or when we get through Jarndyce and Jarndyce , Mr. Blowers " -- a pleasantry that particularly tickled the maces , bags , and purses .
How many people out of the suit Jarndyce and Jarndyce has stretched forth its unwholesome hand to spoil and corrupt would be a very wide question .
From the master upon whose impaling files reams of dusty warrants in Jarndyce and Jarndyce have grimly writhed into many shapes , down to the copying-clerk in the Six Clerks ' Office who has copied his tens of thousands of Chancery folio-pages under that eternal heading , no man 's nature has been made better by it .
In trickery , evasion , procrastination , spoliation , botheration , under false pretences of all sorts , there are influences that can never come to good .
The very solicitors ' boys who have kept the wretched suitors at bay , by protesting time out of mind that Mr. Chizzle , Mizzle , or otherwise was particularly engaged and had appointments until dinner , may have got an extra moral twist and shuffle into themselves out of Jarndyce and Jarndyce .
The receiver in the cause has acquired a goodly sum of money by it but has acquired too a distrust of his own mother and a contempt for his own kind .
Chizzle , Mizzle , and otherwise have lapsed into a habit of vaguely promising themselves that they will look into that outstanding little matter and see what can be done for Drizzle -- who was not well used -- when Jarndyce and Jarndyce shall be got out of the office .
Shirking and sharking in all their many varieties have been sown broadcast by the ill-fated cause ; and even those who have contemplated its history from the outermost circle of such evil have been insensibly tempted into a loose way of letting bad things alone to take their own bad course , and a loose belief that if the world go wrong it was in some off-hand manner never meant to go right .
Chapter 1 Sir Walter Elliot , of Kellynch Hall , in Somersetshire , was a man who , for his own amusement , never took up any book but the Baronetage ; there he found occupation for an idle hour , and consolation in a distressed one ; there his faculties were roused into admiration and respect , by contemplating the limited remnant of the earliest patents ; there any unwelcome sensations , arising from domestic affairs changed naturally into pity and contempt as he turned over the almost endless creations of the last century ; and there , if every other leaf were powerless , he could read his own history with an interest which never failed .
This was the page at which the favourite volume always opened : " ELLIOT OF KELLYNCH HALL .
" Walter Elliot , born March 1 , 1760 , married , July 15 , 1784 , Elizabeth , daughter of James Stevenson , Esq. of South Park , in the county of Gloucester , by which lady ( who died 1800 ) he has issue Elizabeth , born June 1 , 1785 ; Anne , born August 9 , 1787 ; a still-born son , November 5 , 1789 ; Mary , born November 20 , 1791 . "
Precisely such had the paragraph originally stood from the printer 's hands ; but Sir Walter had improved it by adding , for the information of himself and his family , these words , after the date of Mary 's birth -- " Married , December 16 , 1810 , Charles , son and heir of Charles Musgrove , Esq. of Uppercross , in the county of Somerset , " and by inserting most accurately the day of the month on which he had lost his wife .
Then followed the history and rise of the ancient and respectable family , in the usual terms ; how it had been first settled in Cheshire ; how mentioned in Dugdale , serving the office of high sheriff , representing a borough in three successive parliaments , exertions of loyalty , and dignity of baronet , in the first year of Charles II , with all the Marys and Elizabeths they had married ; forming altogether two handsome duodecimo pages , and concluding with the arms and motto : -- " Principal seat , Kellynch Hall , in the county of Somerset , " and Sir Walter 's handwriting again in this finale : -- " Heir presumptive , William Walter Elliot , Esq. , great grandson of the second Sir Walter . "
Vanity was the beginning and the end of Sir Walter Elliot 's character ; vanity of person and of situation .
He had been remarkably handsome in his youth ; and , at fifty-four , was still a very fine man .
Few women could think more of their personal appearance than he did , nor could the valet of any new made lord be more delighted with the place he held in society .
He considered the blessing of beauty as inferior only to the blessing of a baronetcy ; and the Sir Walter Elliot , who united these gifts , was the constant object of his warmest respect and devotion .
His good looks and his rank had one fair claim on his attachment ; since to them he must have owed a wife of very superior character to any thing deserved by his own .
Lady Elliot had been an excellent woman , sensible and amiable ; whose judgement and conduct , if they might be pardoned the youthful infatuation which made her Lady Elliot , had never required indulgence afterwards .
-- She had humoured , or softened , or concealed his failings , and promoted his real respectability for seventeen years ; and though not the very happiest being in the world herself , had found enough in her duties , her friends , and her children , to attach her to life , and make it no matter of indifference to her when she was called on to quit them .
-- Three girls , the two eldest sixteen and fourteen , was an awful legacy for a mother to bequeath , an awful charge rather , to confide to the authority and guidance of a conceited , silly father .
She had , however , one very intimate friend , a sensible , deserving woman , who had been brought , by strong attachment to herself , to settle close by her , in the village of Kellynch ; and on her kindness and advice , Lady Elliot mainly relied for the best help and maintenance of the good principles and instruction which she had been anxiously giving her daughters .
This friend , and Sir Walter , did not marry , whatever might have been anticipated on that head by their acquaintance .
Thirteen years had passed away since Lady Elliot 's death , and they were still near neighbours and intimate friends , and one remained a widower , the other a widow .
That Lady Russell , of steady age and character , and extremely well provided for , should have no thought of a second marriage , needs no apology to the public , which is rather apt to be unreasonably discontented when a woman does marry again , than when she does not ; but Sir Walter 's continuing in singleness requires explanation .
Be it known then , that Sir Walter , like a good father , ( having met with one or two private disappointments in very unreasonable applications ) , prided himself on remaining single for his dear daughters ' sake .
For one daughter , his eldest , he would really have given up any thing , which he had not been very much tempted to do .
Elizabeth had succeeded , at sixteen , to all that was possible , of her mother 's rights and consequence ; and being very handsome , and very like himself , her influence had always been great , and they had gone on together most happily .
His two other children were of very inferior value .
Mary had acquired a little artificial importance , by becoming Mrs Charles Musgrove ; but Anne , with an elegance of mind and sweetness of character , which must have placed her high with any people of real understanding , was nobody with either father or sister ; her word had no weight , her convenience was always to give way -- she was only Anne .
To Lady Russell , indeed , she was a most dear and highly valued god-daughter , favourite , and friend .
Lady Russell loved them all ; but it was only in Anne that she could fancy the mother to revive again .
A few years before , Anne Elliot had been a very pretty girl , but her bloom had vanished early ; and as even in its height , her father had found little to admire in her , ( so totally different were her delicate features and mild dark eyes from his own ) , there could be nothing in them , now that she was faded and thin , to excite his esteem .
He had never indulged much hope , he had now none , of ever reading her name in any other page of his favourite work .
All equality of alliance must rest with Elizabeth , for Mary had merely connected herself with an old country family of respectability and large fortune , and had therefore given all the honour and received none : Elizabeth would , one day or other , marry suitably .
It sometimes happens that a woman is handsomer at twenty-nine than she was ten years before ; and , generally speaking , if there has been neither ill health nor anxiety , it is a time of life at which scarcely any charm is lost .
It was so with Elizabeth , still the same handsome Miss Elliot that she had begun to be thirteen years ago , and Sir Walter might be excused , therefore , in forgetting her age , or , at least , be deemed only half a fool , for thinking himself and Elizabeth as blooming as ever , amidst the wreck of the good looks of everybody else ; for he could plainly see how old all the rest of his family and acquaintance were growing .
Anne haggard , Mary coarse , every face in the neighbourhood worsting , and the rapid increase of the crow 's foot about Lady Russell 's temples had long been a distress to him .
Elizabeth did not quite equal her father in personal contentment .
Thirteen years had seen her mistress of Kellynch Hall , presiding and directing with a self-possession and decision which could never have given the idea of her being younger than she was .
For thirteen years had she been doing the honours , and laying down the domestic law at home , and leading the way to the chaise and four , and walking immediately after Lady Russell out of all the drawing-rooms and dining-rooms in the country .
Thirteen winters ' revolving frosts had seen her opening every ball of credit which a scanty neighbourhood afforded , and thirteen springs shewn their blossoms , as she travelled up to London with her father , for a few weeks ' annual enjoyment of the great world .
She had the remembrance of all this , she had the consciousness of being nine-and-twenty to give her some regrets and some apprehensions ; she was fully satisfied of being still quite as handsome as ever , but she felt her approach to the years of danger , and would have rejoiced to be certain of being properly solicited by baronet-blood within the next twelvemonth or two .
Then might she again take up the book of books with as much enjoyment as in her early youth , but now she liked it not .
Always to be presented with the date of her own birth and see no marriage follow but that of a youngest sister , made the book an evil ; and more than once , when her father had left it open on the table near her , had she closed it , with averted eyes , and pushed it away .
She had had a disappointment , moreover , which that book , and especially the history of her own family , must ever present the remembrance of .
The heir presumptive , the very William Walter Elliot , Esq. , whose rights had been so generously supported by her father , had disappointed her .
She had , while a very young girl , as soon as she had known him to be , in the event of her having no brother , the future baronet , meant to marry him , and her father had always meant that she should .
He had not been known to them as a boy ; but soon after Lady Elliot 's death , Sir Walter had sought the acquaintance , and though his overtures had not been met with any warmth , he had persevered in seeking it , making allowance for the modest drawing-back of youth ; and , in one of their spring excursions to London , when Elizabeth was in her first bloom , Mr Elliot had been forced into the introduction .
He was at that time a very young man , just engaged in the study of the law ; and Elizabeth found him extremely agreeable , and every plan in his favour was confirmed .
He was invited to Kellynch Hall ; he was talked of and expected all the rest of the year ; but he never came .
The following spring he was seen again in town , found equally agreeable , again encouraged , invited , and expected , and again he did not come ; and the next tidings were that he was married .
Instead of pushing his fortune in the line marked out for the heir of the house of Elliot , he had purchased independence by uniting himself to a rich woman of inferior birth .
The " Red Death " had long devastated the country .
No pestilence had ever been so fatal , or so hideous .
Blood was its Avatar and its seal -- the redness and the horror of blood .
There were sharp pains , and sudden dizziness , and then profuse bleeding at the pores , with dissolution .
The scarlet stains upon the body and especially upon the face of the victim , were the pest ban which shut him out from the aid and from the sympathy of his fellow-men .
And the whole seizure , progress and termination of the disease , were the incidents of half an hour .
But the Prince Prospero was happy and dauntless and sagacious .
When his dominions were half depopulated , he summoned to his presence a thousand hale and light-hearted friends from among the knights and dames of his court , and with these retired to the deep seclusion of one of his castellated abbeys .
This was an extensive and magnificent structure , the creation of the prince 's own eccentric yet august taste .
A strong and lofty wall girdled it in .
This wall had gates of iron .
The courtiers , having entered , brought furnaces and massy hammers and welded the bolts .
They resolved to leave means neither of ingress nor egress to the sudden impulses of despair or of frenzy from within .
The abbey was amply provisioned .
With such precautions the courtiers might bid defiance to contagion .
The external world could take care of itself .
In the meantime it was folly to grieve , or to think .
The prince had provided all the appliances of pleasure .
There were buffoons , there were improvisatori , there were ballet-dancers , there were musicians , there was Beauty , there was wine .
All these and security were within .
Without was the " Red Death " .
It was towards the close of the fifth or sixth month of his seclusion , and while the pestilence raged most furiously abroad , that the Prince Prospero entertained his thousand friends at a masked ball of the most unusual magnificence .
It was a voluptuous scene , that masquerade .
But first let me tell of the rooms in which it was held .
These were seven -- an imperial suite .
In many palaces , however , such suites form a long and straight vista , while the folding doors slide back nearly to the walls on either hand , so that the view of the whole extent is scarcely impeded .
Here the case was very different , as might have been expected from the duke 's love of the _ bizarre _ .
The apartments were so irregularly disposed that the vision embraced but little more than one at a time .
There was a sharp turn at every twenty or thirty yards , and at each turn a novel effect .
To the right and left , in the middle of each wall , a tall and narrow Gothic window looked out upon a closed corridor which pursued the windings of the suite .
These windows were of stained glass whose colour varied in accordance with the prevailing hue of the decorations of the chamber into which it opened .
That at the eastern extremity was hung , for example in blue -- and vividly blue were its windows .
The second chamber was purple in its ornaments and tapestries , and here the panes were purple .
The third was green throughout , and so were the casements .
The fourth was furnished and lighted with orange -- the fifth with white -- the sixth with violet .
The seventh apartment was closely shrouded in black velvet tapestries that hung all over the ceiling and down the walls , falling in heavy folds upon a carpet of the same material and hue .
But in this chamber only , the colour of the windows failed to correspond with the decorations .
The panes here were scarlet -- a deep blood colour .
Now in no one of the seven apartments was there any lamp or candelabrum , amid the profusion of golden ornaments that lay scattered to and fro or depended from the roof .
There was no light of any kind emanating from lamp or candle within the suite of chambers .
But in the corridors that followed the suite , there stood , opposite to each window , a heavy tripod , bearing a brazier of fire , that projected its rays through the tinted glass and so glaringly illumined the room .
And thus were produced a multitude of gaudy and fantastic appearances .
But in the western or black chamber the effect of the fire-light that streamed upon the dark hangings through the blood-tinted panes , was ghastly in the extreme , and produced so wild a look upon the countenances of those who entered , that there were few of the company bold enough to set foot within its precincts at all .
It was in this apartment , also , that there stood against the western wall , a gigantic clock of ebony .
Its pendulum swung to and fro with a dull , heavy , monotonous clang ; and when the minute-hand made the circuit of the face , and the hour was to be stricken , there came from the brazen lungs of the clock a sound which was clear and loud and deep and exceedingly musical , but of so peculiar a note and emphasis that , at each lapse of an hour , the musicians of the orchestra were constrained to pause , momentarily , in their performance , to harken to the sound ; and thus the waltzers perforce ceased their evolutions ; and there was a brief disconcert of the whole gay company ; and , while the chimes of the clock yet rang , it was observed that the giddiest grew pale , and the more aged and sedate passed their hands over their brows as if in confused revery or meditation .
But when the echoes had fully ceased , a light laughter at once pervaded the assembly ; the musicians looked at each other and smiled as if at their own nervousness and folly , and made whispering vows , each to the other , that the next chiming of the clock should produce in them no similar emotion ; and then , after the lapse of sixty minutes , ( which embrace three thousand and six hundred seconds of the Time that flies , ) there came yet another chiming of the clock , and then were the same disconcert and tremulousness and meditation as before .
But , in spite of these things , it was a gay and magnificent revel .
The tastes of the duke were peculiar .
He had a fine eye for colours and effects .
He disregarded the _ decora _ of mere fashion .
His plans were bold and fiery , and his conceptions glowed with barbaric lustre .
There are some who would have thought him mad .
His followers felt that he was not .
It was necessary to hear and see and touch him to be _ sure _ that he was not .
He had directed , in great part , the movable embellishments of the seven chambers , upon occasion of this great _ fête _ ; and it was his own guiding taste which had given character to the masqueraders .
Be sure they were grotesque .
There were much glare and glitter and piquancy and phantasm -- much of what has been since seen in " Hernani " .
There were arabesque figures with unsuited limbs and appointments .
There were delirious fancies such as the madman fashions .
There were much of the beautiful , much of the wanton , much of the _ bizarre _ , something of the terrible , and not a little of that which might have excited disgust .
To and fro in the seven chambers there stalked , in fact , a multitude of dreams .
And these -- the dreams -- writhed in and about taking hue from the rooms , and causing the wild music of the orchestra to seem as the echo of their steps .
And , anon , there strikes the ebony clock which stands in the hall of the velvet .
And then , for a moment , all is still , and all is silent save the voice of the clock .
The dreams are stiff-frozen as they stand .
But the echoes of the chime die away -- they have endured but an instant -- and a light , half-subdued laughter floats after them as they depart .
And now again the music swells , and the dreams live , and writhe to and fro more merrily than ever , taking hue from the many tinted windows through which stream the rays from the tripods .
But to the chamber which lies most westwardly of the seven , there are now none of the maskers who venture ; for the night is waning away ; and there flows a ruddier light through the blood-coloured panes ; and the blackness of the sable drapery appals ; and to him whose foot falls upon the sable carpet , there comes from the near clock of ebony a muffled peal more solemnly emphatic than any which reaches _ their _ ears who indulged in the more remote gaieties of the other apartments .
But these other apartments were densely crowded , and in them beat feverishly the heart of life .
And the revel went whirlingly on , until at length there commenced the sounding of midnight upon the clock .
And then the music ceased , as I have told ; and the evolutions of the waltzers were quieted ; and there was an uneasy cessation of all things as before .
But now there were twelve strokes to be sounded by the bell of the clock ; and thus it happened , perhaps , that more of thought crept , with more of time , into the meditations of the thoughtful among those who revelled .
And thus too , it happened , perhaps , that before the last echoes of the last chime had utterly sunk into silence , there were many individuals in the crowd who had found leisure to become aware of the presence of a masked figure which had arrested the attention of no single individual before .
And the rumour of this new presence having spread itself whisperingly around , there arose at length from the whole company a buzz , or murmur , expressive of disapprobation and surprise -- then , finally , of terror , of horror , and of disgust .
In an assembly of phantasms such as I have painted , it may well be supposed that no ordinary appearance could have excited such sensation .
In truth the masquerade licence of the night was nearly unlimited ; but the figure in question had out-Heroded Herod , and gone beyond the bounds of even the prince 's indefinite decorum .
There are chords in the hearts of the most reckless which can not be touched without emotion .
Even with the utterly lost , to whom life and death are equally jests , there are matters of which no jest can be made .
The whole company , indeed , seemed now deeply to feel that in the costume and bearing of the stranger neither wit nor propriety existed .
The figure was tall and gaunt , and shrouded from head to foot in the habiliments of the grave .
The mask which concealed the visage was made so nearly to resemble the countenance of a stiffened corpse that the closest scrutiny must have had difficulty in detecting the cheat .
And yet all this might have been endured , if not approved , by the mad revellers around .
But the mummer had gone so far as to assume the type of the Red Death .
His vesture was dabbled in _ blood _ -- and his broad brow , with all the features of the face , was besprinkled with the scarlet horror .
Phase the First : The Maiden I On an evening in the latter part of May a middle-aged man was walking homeward from Shaston to the village of Marlott , in the adjoining Vale of Blakemore , or Blackmoor .
The pair of legs that carried him were rickety , and there was a bias in his gait which inclined him somewhat to the left of a straight line .
He occasionally gave a smart nod , as if in confirmation of some opinion , though he was not thinking of anything in particular .
An empty egg-basket was slung upon his arm , the nap of his hat was ruffled , a patch being quite worn away at its brim where his thumb came in taking it off .
Presently he was met by an elderly parson astride on a gray mare , who , as he rode , hummed a wandering tune .
" Good night t ' ee , " said the man with the basket .
" Good night , Sir John , " said the parson .
The pedestrian , after another pace or two , halted , and turned round .
" Now , sir , begging your pardon ; we met last market-day on this road about this time , and I said ' Good night , ' and you made reply ' _ Good night , Sir John _ , ' as now . "
" I did , " said the parson .
" And once before that -- near a month ago . "
" I may have . "
" Then what might your meaning be in calling me ' Sir John ' these different times , when I be plain Jack Durbeyfield , the haggler ? "
The parson rode a step or two nearer .
" It was only my whim , " he said ; and , after a moment 's hesitation : " It was on account of a discovery I made some little time ago , whilst I was hunting up pedigrees for the new county history .
I am Parson Tringham , the antiquary , of Stagfoot Lane .
Do n't you really know , Durbeyfield , that you are the lineal representative of the ancient and knightly family of the d'Urbervilles , who derive their descent from Sir Pagan d'Urberville , that renowned knight who came from Normandy with William the Conqueror , as appears by Battle Abbey Roll ? "
" Never heard it before , sir ! "
" Well it 's true .
Throw up your chin a moment , so that I may catch the profile of your face better .
Yes , that 's the d'Urberville nose and chin -- a little debased .
Your ancestor was one of the twelve knights who assisted the Lord of Estremavilla in Normandy in his conquest of Glamorganshire .
Branches of your family held manors over all this part of England ; their names appear in the Pipe Rolls in the time of King Stephen .
In the reign of King John one of them was rich enough to give a manor to the Knights Hospitallers ; and in Edward the Second 's time your forefather Brian was summoned to Westminster to attend the great Council there .
You declined a little in Oliver Cromwell 's time , but to no serious extent , and in Charles the Second 's reign you were made Knights of the Royal Oak for your loyalty .
Aye , there have been generations of Sir Johns among you , and if knighthood were hereditary , like a baronetcy , as it practically was in old times , when men were knighted from father to son , you would be Sir John now . "
" Ye do n't say so ! "
" In short , " concluded the parson , decisively smacking his leg with his switch , " there 's hardly such another family in England . "
" Daze my eyes , and is n't there ? "
said Durbeyfield .
" And here have I been knocking about , year after year , from pillar to post , as if I was no more than the commonest feller in the parish ... And how long hev this news about me been knowed , Pa ' son Tringham ? "
The clergyman explained that , as far as he was aware , it had quite died out of knowledge , and could hardly be said to be known at all .
His own investigations had begun on a day in the preceding spring when , having been engaged in tracing the vicissitudes of the d'Urberville family , he had observed Durbeyfield 's name on his waggon , and had thereupon been led to make inquiries about his father and grandfather till he had no doubt on the subject .
" At first I resolved not to disturb you with such a useless piece of information , " said he .
" However , our impulses are too strong for our judgement sometimes .
I thought you might perhaps know something of it all the while . "
" Well , I have heard once or twice , 't is true , that my family had seen better days afore they came to Blackmoor .
But I took no notice o ' t , thinking it to mean that we had once kept two horses where we now keep only one .
I 've got a wold silver spoon , and a wold graven seal at home , too ; but , Lord , what 's a spoon and seal ?
... And to think that I and these noble d'Urbervilles were one flesh all the time .
'T was said that my gr ' t-granfer had secrets , and did n't care to talk of where he came from ... And where do we raise our smoke , now , parson , if I may make so bold ; I mean , where do we d'Urbervilles live ? "
" You do n't live anywhere .
You are extinct -- as a county family . "
" That 's bad . "
" Yes -- what the mendacious family chronicles call extinct in the male line -- that is , gone down -- gone under . "
" Then where do we lie ? "
" At Kingsbere-sub-Greenhill : rows and rows of you in your vaults , with your effigies under Purbeck-marble canopies . "
" And where be our family mansions and estates ? "
" You have n't any . "
" Oh ?
No lands neither ? "
" None ; though you once had 'em in abundance , as I said , for you family consisted of numerous branches .
In this county there was a seat of yours at Kingsbere , and another at Sherton , and another in Millpond , and another at Lullstead , and another at Wellbridge . "
" And shall we ever come into our own again ? "
" Ah -- that I ca n't tell ! "
" And what had I better do about it , sir ? "
asked Durbeyfield , after a pause .
" Oh -- nothing , nothing ; except chasten yourself with the thought of ' how are the mighty fallen . '
It is a fact of some interest to the local historian and genealogist , nothing more .
There are several families among the cottagers of this county of almost equal lustre .
Good night . "
" But you 'll turn back and have a quart of beer wi ' me on the strength o ' t , Pa ' son Tringham ?
There 's a very pretty brew in tap at The Pure Drop -- though , to be sure , not so good as at Rolliver 's . "
" No , thank you -- not this evening , Durbeyfield .
You 've had enough already . "
Concluding thus , the parson rode on his way , with doubts as to his discretion in retailing this curious bit of lore .
When he was gone , Durbeyfield walked a few steps in a profound reverie , and then sat down upon the grassy bank by the roadside , depositing his basket before him .
In a few minutes a youth appeared in the distance , walking in the same direction as that which had been pursued by Durbeyfield .
The latter , on seeing him , held up his hand , and the lad quickened his pace and came near .
" Boy , take up that basket !
I want ' ee to go on an errand for me . "
The lath-like stripling frowned .
" Who be you , then , John Durbeyfield , to order me about and call me ' boy ' ?
You know my name as well as I know yours ! "
" Do you , do you ?
That 's the secret -- that 's the secret !
Now obey my orders , and take the message I 'm going to charge ' ee wi ' ... Well , Fred , I do n't mind telling you that the secret is that I 'm one of a noble race -- it has been just found out by me this present afternoon , P.M. " And as he made the announcement , Durbeyfield , declining from his sitting position , luxuriously stretched himself out upon the bank among the daisies .
The lad stood before Durbeyfield , and contemplated his length from crown to toe .
" Sir John d'Urberville -- that 's who I am , " continued the prostrate man .
" That is if knights were baronets -- which they be .
'T is recorded in history all about me .
Dost know of such a place , lad , as Kingsbere-sub-Greenhill ? "
" Ees .
I 've been there to Greenhill Fair . "
" Well , under the church of that city there lie -- " " 'T is n't a city , the place I mean ; leastwise ' twaddn ' when I was there -- 't was a little one-eyed , blinking sort o ' place . "
" Never you mind the place , boy , that 's not the question before us .
Under the church of that there parish lie my ancestors -- hundreds of 'em -- in coats of mail and jewels , in gr ' t lead coffins weighing tons and tons .
There 's not a man in the county o ' South-Wessex that 's got grander and nobler skillentons in his family than I. " " Oh ? "
" Now take up that basket , and goo on to Marlott , and when you 've come to The Pure Drop Inn , tell 'em to send a horse and carriage to me immed ' ately , to carry me hwome .
And in the bottom o ' the carriage they be to put a noggin o ' rum in a small bottle , and chalk it up to my account .
And when you 've done that goo on to my house with the basket , and tell my wife to put away that washing , because she need n't finish it , and wait till I come hwome , as I 've news to tell her . "
As the lad stood in a dubious attitude , Durbeyfield put his hand in his pocket , and produced a shilling , one of the chronically few that he possessed .
" Here 's for your labour , lad . "
This made a difference in the young man 's estimate of the position .
I am a rather elderly man .
The nature of my avocations for the last thirty years has brought me into more than ordinary contact with what would seem an interesting and somewhat singular set of men , of whom as yet nothing that I know of has ever been written : -- I mean the law-copyists or scriveners .
I have known very many of them , professionally and privately , and if I pleased , could relate divers histories , at which good-natured gentlemen might smile , and sentimental souls might weep .
But I waive the biographies of all other scriveners for a few passages in the life of Bartleby , who was a scrivener of the strangest I ever saw or heard of .
While of other law-copyists I might write the complete life , of Bartleby nothing of that sort can be done .
I believe that no materials exist for a full and satisfactory biography of this man .
It is an irreparable loss to literature .
Bartleby was one of those beings of whom nothing is ascertainable , except from the original sources , and in his case those are very small .
What my own astonished eyes saw of Bartleby , _ that _ is all I know of him , except , indeed , one vague report which will appear in the sequel .
Ere introducing the scrivener , as he first appeared to me , it is fit I make some mention of myself , my _ employees _ , my business , my chambers , and general surroundings ; because some such description is indispensable to an adequate understanding of the chief character about to be presented .
Imprimis : I am a man who , from his youth upwards , has been filled with a profound conviction that the easiest way of life is the best .
Hence , though I belong to a profession proverbially energetic and nervous , even to turbulence , at times , yet nothing of that sort have I ever suffered to invade my peace .
I am one of those unambitious lawyers who never addresses a jury , or in any way draws down public applause ; but in the cool tranquility of a snug retreat , do a snug business among rich men 's bonds and mortgages and title-deeds .
All who know me , consider me an eminently _ safe _ man .
The late John Jacob Astor , a personage little given to poetic enthusiasm , had no hesitation in pronouncing my first grand point to be prudence ; my next , method .
I do not speak it in vanity , but simply record the fact , that I was not unemployed in my profession by the late John Jacob Astor ; a name which , I admit , I love to repeat , for it hath a rounded and orbicular sound to it , and rings like unto bullion .
I will freely add , that I was not insensible to the late John Jacob Astor 's good opinion .
Some time prior to the period at which this little history begins , my avocations had been largely increased .
The good old office , now extinct in the State of New York , of a Master in Chancery , had been conferred upon me .
It was not a very arduous office , but very pleasantly remunerative .
I seldom lose my temper ; much more seldom indulge in dangerous indignation at wrongs and outrages ; but I must be permitted to be rash here and declare , that I consider the sudden and violent abrogation of the office of Master in Chancery , by the new Constitution , as a -- premature act ; inasmuch as I had counted upon a life-lease of the profits , whereas I only received those of a few short years .
But this is by the way .
My chambers were up stairs at No .
-- Wall-street .
At one end they looked upon the white wall of the interior of a spacious sky-light shaft , penetrating the building from top to bottom .
This view might have been considered rather tame than otherwise , deficient in what landscape painters call " life . "
But if so , the view from the other end of my chambers offered , at least , a contrast , if nothing more .
In that direction my windows commanded an unobstructed view of a lofty brick wall , black by age and everlasting shade ; which wall required no spy-glass to bring out its lurking beauties , but for the benefit of all near-sighted spectators , was pushed up to within ten feet of my window panes .
Owing to the great height of the surrounding buildings , and my chambers being on the second floor , the interval between this wall and mine not a little resembled a huge square cistern .
At the period just preceding the advent of Bartleby , I had two persons as copyists in my employment , and a promising lad as an office-boy .
First , Turkey ; second , Nippers ; third , Ginger Nut .
These may seem names , the like of which are not usually found in the Directory .
In truth they were nicknames , mutually conferred upon each other by my three clerks , and were deemed expressive of their respective persons or characters .
Turkey was a short , pursy Englishman of about my own age , that is , somewhere not far from sixty .
In the morning , one might say , his face was of a fine florid hue , but after twelve o'clock , meridian -- his dinner hour -- it blazed like a grate full of Christmas coals ; and continued blazing -- but , as it were , with a gradual wane -- till 6 o'clock , P.M. or thereabouts , after which I saw no more of the proprietor of the face , which gaining its meridian with the sun , seemed to set with it , to rise , culminate , and decline the following day , with the like regularity and undiminished glory .
There are many singular coincidences I have known in the course of my life , not the least among which was the fact , that exactly when Turkey displayed his fullest beams from his red and radiant countenance , just then , too , at that critical moment , began the daily period when I considered his business capacities as seriously disturbed for the remainder of the twenty-four hours .
Not that he was absolutely idle , or averse to business then ; far from it .
The difficulty was , he was apt to be altogether too energetic .
There was a strange , inflamed , flurried , flighty recklessness of activity about him .
He would be incautious in dipping his pen into his inkstand .
All his blots upon my documents , were dropped there after twelve o'clock , meridian .
Indeed , not only would he be reckless and sadly given to making blots in the afternoon , but some days he went further , and was rather noisy .
At such times , too , his face flamed with augmented blazonry , as if cannel coal had been heaped on anthracite .
He made an unpleasant racket with his chair ; spilled his sand-box ; in mending his pens , impatiently split them all to pieces , and threw them on the floor in a sudden passion ; stood up and leaned over his table , boxing his papers about in a most indecorous manner , very sad to behold in an elderly man like him .
Nevertheless , as he was in many ways a most valuable person to me , and all the time before twelve o'clock , meridian , was the quickest , steadiest creature too , accomplishing a great deal of work in a style not easy to be matched -- for these reasons , I was willing to overlook his eccentricities , though indeed , occasionally , I remonstrated with him .
I did this very gently , however , because , though the civilest , nay , the blandest and most reverential of men in the morning , yet in the afternoon he was disposed , upon provocation , to be slightly rash with his tongue , in fact , insolent .
Now , valuing his morning services as I did , and resolved not to lose them ; yet , at the same time made uncomfortable by his inflamed ways after twelve o'clock ; and being a man of peace , unwilling by my admonitions to call forth unseemly retorts from him ; I took upon me , one Saturday noon ( he was always worse on Saturdays ) , to hint to him , very kindly , that perhaps now that he was growing old , it might be well to abridge his labors ; in short , he need not come to my chambers after twelve o'clock , but , dinner over , had best go home to his lodgings and rest himself till teatime .
But no ; he insisted upon his afternoon devotions .
His countenance became intolerably fervid , as he oratorically assured me -- gesticulating with a long ruler at the other end of the room -- that if his services in the morning were useful , how indispensable , then , in the afternoon ?
" With submission , sir , " said Turkey on this occasion , " I consider myself your right-hand man .
In the morning I but marshal and deploy my columns ; but in the afternoon I put myself at their head , and gallantly charge the foe , thus ! "
-- and he made a violent thrust with the ruler .
" But the blots , Turkey , " intimated I. " True , -- but , with submission , sir , behold these hairs !
I am getting old .
Surely , sir , a blot or two of a warm afternoon is not to be severely urged against gray hairs .
Old age -- even if it blot the page -- is honorable .
With submission , sir , we _ both _ are getting old . "
This appeal to my fellow-feeling was hardly to be resisted .
At all events , I saw that go he would not .
So I made up my mind to let him stay , resolving , nevertheless , to see to it , that during the afternoon he had to do with my less important papers .
Nippers , the second on my list , was a whiskered , sallow , and , upon the whole , rather piratical-looking young man of about five and twenty .
I always deemed him the victim of two evil powers -- ambition and indigestion .
The ambition was evinced by a certain impatience of the duties of a mere copyist , an unwarrantable usurpation of strictly professional affairs , such as the original drawing up of legal documents .
The indigestion seemed betokened in an occasional nervous testiness and grinning irritability , causing the teeth to audibly grind together over mistakes committed in copying ; unnecessary maledictions , hissed , rather than spoken , in the heat of business ; and especially by a continual discontent with the height of the table where he worked .
Though of a very ingenious mechanical turn , Nippers could never get this table to suit him .
He put chips under it , blocks of various sorts , bits of pasteboard , and at last went so far as to attempt an exquisite adjustment by final pieces of folded blotting paper .
But no invention would answer .
If , for the sake of easing his back , he brought the table lid at a sharp angle well up towards his chin , and wrote there like a man using the steep roof of a Dutch house for his desk : -- then he declared that it stopped the circulation in his arms .
If now he lowered the table to his waistbands , and stooped over it in writing , then there was a sore aching in his back .
In short , the truth of the matter was , Nippers knew not what he wanted .
Or , if he wanted any thing , it was to be rid of a scrivener 's table altogether .
Among the manifestations of his diseased ambition was a fondness he had for receiving visits from certain ambiguous-looking fellows in seedy coats , whom he called his clients .
Indeed I was aware that not only was he , at times , considerable of a ward-politician , but he occasionally did a little business at the Justices ' courts , and was not unknown on the steps of the Tombs .
I have good reason to believe , however , that one individual who called upon him at my chambers , and who , with a grand air , he insisted was his client , was no other than a dun , and the alleged title-deed , a bill .
But with all his failings , and the annoyances he caused me , Nippers , like his compatriot Turkey , was a very useful man to me ; wrote a neat , swift hand ; and , when he chose , was not deficient in a gentlemanly sort of deportment .
Added to this , he always dressed in a gentlemanly sort of way ; and so , incidentally , reflected credit upon my chambers .
Whereas with respect to Turkey , I had much ado to keep him from being a reproach to me .
His clothes were apt to look oily and smell of eating-houses .
He wore his pantaloons very loose and baggy in summer .
His coats were execrable ; his hat not to be handled .
But while the hat was a thing of indifference to me , inasmuch as his natural civility and deference , as a dependent Englishman , always led him to doff it the moment he entered the room , yet his coat was another matter .
Concerning his coats , I reasoned with him ; but with no effect .
The truth was , I suppose , that a man of so small an income , could not afford to sport such a lustrous face and a lustrous coat at one and the same time .
As Nippers once observed , Turkey 's money went chiefly for red ink .
One winter day I presented Turkey with a highly-respectable looking coat of my own , a padded gray coat , of a most comfortable warmth , and which buttoned straight up from the knee to the neck .
I thought Turkey would appreciate the favor , and abate his rashness and obstreperousness of afternoons .
But no .
I verily believe that buttoning himself up in so downy and blanket-like a coat had a pernicious effect upon him ; upon the same principle that too much oats are bad for horses .
In fact , precisely as a rash , restive horse is said to feel his oats , so Turkey felt his coat .
It made him insolent .
He was a man whom prosperity harmed .
CHAPTER I THERE IS NO ONE LEFT When Mary Lennox was sent to Misselthwaite Manor to live with her uncle everybody said she was the most disagreeable-looking child ever seen .
It was true , too .
She had a little thin face and a little thin body , thin light hair and a sour expression .
Her hair was yellow , and her face was yellow because she had been born in India and had always been ill in one way or another .
Her father had held a position under the English Government and had always been busy and ill himself , and her mother had been a great beauty who cared only to go to parties and amuse herself with gay people .
She had not wanted a little girl at all , and when Mary was born she handed her over to the care of an Ayah , who was made to understand that if she wished to please the Mem Sahib she must keep the child out of sight as much as possible .
So when she was a sickly , fretful , ugly little baby she was kept out of the way , and when she became a sickly , fretful , toddling thing she was kept out of the way also .
She never remembered seeing familiarly anything but the dark faces of her Ayah and the other native servants , and as they always obeyed her and gave her her own way in everything , because the Mem Sahib would be angry if she was disturbed by her crying , by the time she was six years old she was as tyrannical and selfish a little pig as ever lived .
The young English governess who came to teach her to read and write disliked her so much that she gave up her place in three months , and when other governesses came to try to fill it they always went away in a shorter time than the first one .
So if Mary had not chosen to really want to know how to read books she would never have learned her letters at all .
One frightfully hot morning , when she was about nine years old , she awakened feeling very cross , and she became crosser still when she saw that the servant who stood by her bedside was not her Ayah .
" Why did you come ? " she said to the strange woman .
" I will not let you stay .
Send my Ayah to me . "
The woman looked frightened , but she only stammered that the Ayah could not come and when Mary threw herself into a passion and beat and kicked her , she looked only more frightened and repeated that it was not possible for the Ayah to come to Missie Sahib .
There was something mysterious in the air that morning .
Nothing was done in its regular order and several of the native servants seemed missing , while those whom Mary saw slunk or hurried about with ashy and scared faces .
But no one would tell her anything and her Ayah did not come .
She was actually left alone as the morning went on , and at last she wandered out into the garden and began to play by herself under a tree near the veranda .
She pretended that she was making a flower-bed , and she stuck big scarlet hibiscus blossoms into little heaps of earth , all the time growing more and more angry and muttering to herself the things she would say and the names she would call Saidie when she returned .
" Pig !
Pig !
Daughter of Pigs ! " she said , because to call a native a pig is the worst insult of all .
She was grinding her teeth and saying this over and over again when she heard her mother come out on the veranda with some one .
She was with a fair young man and they stood talking together in low strange voices .
Mary knew the fair young man who looked like a boy .
She had heard that he was a very young officer who had just come from England .
The child stared at him , but she stared most at her mother .
She always did this when she had a chance to see her , because the Mem Sahib -- Mary used to call her that oftener than anything else -- was such a tall , slim , pretty person and wore such lovely clothes .
Her hair was like curly silk and she had a delicate little nose which seemed to be disdaining things , and she had large laughing eyes .
All her clothes were thin and floating , and Mary said they were " full of lace . "
They looked fuller of lace than ever this morning , but her eyes were not laughing at all .
They were large and scared and lifted imploringly to the fair boy officer 's face .
" Is it so very bad ?
Oh , is it ? "
Mary heard her say .
" Awfully , " the young man answered in a trembling voice .
" Awfully , Mrs. Lennox .
You ought to have gone to the hills two weeks ago . "
The Mem Sahib wrung her hands .
" Oh , I know I ought ! " she cried .
" I only stayed to go to that silly dinner party .
What a fool I was ! "
At that very moment such a loud sound of wailing broke out from the servants ' quarters that she clutched the young man 's arm , and Mary stood shivering from head to foot .
The wailing grew wilder and wilder .
" What is it ?
What is it ? "
Mrs. Lennox gasped .
" Some one has died , " answered the boy officer .
" You did not say it had broken out among your servants . "
" I did not know ! " the Mem Sahib cried .
" Come with me !
Come with me ! " and she turned and ran into the house .
After that , appalling things happened , and the mysteriousness of the morning was explained to Mary .
The cholera had broken out in its most fatal form and people were dying like flies .
The Ayah had been taken ill in the night , and it was because she had just died that the servants had wailed in the huts .
Before the next day three other servants were dead and others had run away in terror .
There was panic on every side , and dying people in all the bungalows .
During the confusion and bewilderment of the second day Mary hid herself in the nursery and was forgotten by everyone .
Nobody thought of her , nobody wanted her , and strange things happened of which she knew nothing .
Mary alternately cried and slept through the hours .
She only knew that people were ill and that she heard mysterious and frightening sounds .
Once she crept into the dining-room and found it empty , though a partly finished meal was on the table and chairs and plates looked as if they had been hastily pushed back when the diners rose suddenly for some reason .
The child ate some fruit and biscuits , and being thirsty she drank a glass of wine which stood nearly filled .
It was sweet , and she did not know how strong it was .
Very soon it made her intensely drowsy , and she went back to her nursery and shut herself in again , frightened by cries she heard in the huts and by the hurrying sound of feet .
The wine made her so sleepy that she could scarcely keep her eyes open and she lay down on her bed and knew nothing more for a long time .
Many things happened during the hours in which she slept so heavily , but she was not disturbed by the wails and the sound of things being carried in and out of the bungalow .
When she awakened she lay and stared at the wall .
The house was perfectly still .
She had never known it to be so silent before .
She heard neither voices nor footsteps , and wondered if everybody had got well of the cholera and all the trouble was over .
She wondered also who would take care of her now her Ayah was dead .
There would be a new Ayah , and perhaps she would know some new stories .
Mary had been rather tired of the old ones .
She did not cry because her nurse had died .
She was not an affectionate child and had never cared much for any one .
The noise and hurrying about and wailing over the cholera had frightened her , and she had been angry because no one seemed to remember that she was alive .
Everyone was too panic-stricken to think of a little girl no one was fond of .
When people had the cholera it seemed that they remembered nothing but themselves .
But if everyone had got well again , surely some one would remember and come to look for her .
But no one came , and as she lay waiting the house seemed to grow more and more silent .
She heard something rustling on the matting and when she looked down she saw a little snake gliding along and watching her with eyes like jewels .
She was not frightened , because he was a harmless little thing who would not hurt her and he seemed in a hurry to get out of the room .
He slipped under the door as she watched him .
" How queer and quiet it is , " she said .
" It sounds as if there were no one in the bungalow but me and the snake . "
Almost the next minute she heard footsteps in the compound , and then on the veranda .
They were men 's footsteps , and the men entered the bungalow and talked in low voices .
No one went to meet or speak to them and they seemed to open doors and look into rooms .
" What desolation ! " she heard one voice say .
" That pretty , pretty woman !
I suppose the child , too .
I heard there was a child , though no one ever saw her . "
Mary was standing in the middle of the nursery when they opened the door a few minutes later .
She looked an ugly , cross little thing and was frowning because she was beginning to be hungry and feel disgracefully neglected .
The first man who came in was a large officer she had once seen talking to her father .
He looked tired and troubled , but when he saw her he was so startled that he almost jumped back .
" Barney ! " he cried out .
" There is a child here !
A child alone !
In a place like this !
Mercy on us , who is she ! "
" I am Mary Lennox , " the little girl said , drawing herself up stiffly .
She thought the man was very rude to call her father 's bungalow " A place like this ! "
" I fell asleep when everyone had the cholera and I have only just wakened up .
Why does nobody come ? "
" It is the child no one ever saw ! " exclaimed the man , turning to his companions .
" She has actually been forgotten ! "
PROLOGUE IT was 2 p.m. on the afternoon of May 7 , 1915 .
The _ Lusitania _ had been struck by two torpedoes in succession and was sinking rapidly , while the boats were being launched with all possible speed .
The women and children were being lined up awaiting their turn .
Some still clung desperately to husbands and fathers ; others clutched their children closely to their breasts .
One girl stood alone , slightly apart from the rest .
She was quite young , not more than eighteen .
She did not seem afraid , and her grave , steadfast eyes looked straight ahead .
“ I beg your pardon . ”
A man ’s voice beside her made her start and turn .
She had noticed the speaker more than once amongst the first-class passengers .
There had been a hint of mystery about him which had appealed to her imagination .
He spoke to no one .
If anyone spoke to him he was quick to rebuff the overture .
Also he had a nervous way of looking over his shoulder with a swift , suspicious glance .
She noticed now that he was greatly agitated .
There were beads of perspiration on his brow .
He was evidently in a state of overmastering fear .
And yet he did not strike her as the kind of man who would be afraid to meet death !
“ Yes ? ”
Her grave eyes met his inquiringly .
He stood looking at her with a kind of desperate irresolution .
“ It must be ! ” he muttered to himself .
“ Yes -- it is the only way . ”
Then aloud he said abruptly : “ You are an American ? ”
“ Yes . ”
“ A patriotic one ? ”
The girl flushed .
“ I guess you ’ve no right to ask such a thing !
Of course I am ! ”
“ Do n’t be offended .
You would n’t be if you knew how much there was at stake .
But I ’ve got to trust some one -- and it must be a woman . ”
“ Why ? ”
“ Because of ‘ women and children first .
’” He looked round and lowered his voice .
“ I ’m carrying papers -- vitally important papers .
They may make all the difference to the Allies in the war .
You understand ?
These papers have _ got _ to be saved !
They ’ve more chance with you than with me .
Will you take them ? ”
The girl held out her hand .
“ Wait -- I must warn you .
There may be a risk -- if I ’ve been followed .
I do n’t think I have , but one never knows .
If so , there will be danger .
Have you the nerve to go through with it ? ”
The girl smiled .
“ I ’ll go through with it all right .
And I ’m real proud to be chosen !
What am I to do with them afterwards ? ”
“ Watch the newspapers !
I ’ll advertise in the personal column of the _ Times _ , beginning ‘ Shipmate . ’
At the end of three days if there ’s nothing -- well , you ’ll know I ’m down and out .
Then take the packet to the American Embassy , and deliver it into the Ambassador ’s own hands .
Is that clear ? ”
“ Quite clear . ”
“ Then be ready -- I ’m going to say good-bye . ”
He took her hand in his .
“ Good-bye .
Good luck to you , ” he said in a louder tone .
Her hand closed on the oilskin packet that had lain in his palm .
The _ Lusitania _ settled with a more decided list to starboard .
In answer to a quick command , the girl went forward to take her place in the boat .
CHAPTER I .
THE YOUNG ADVENTURERS , LTD .
“ TOMMY , old thing ! ”
“ Tuppence , old bean ! ”
The two young people greeted each other affectionately , and momentarily blocked the Dover Street Tube exit in doing so .
The adjective “ old ” was misleading .
Their united ages would certainly not have totalled forty-five .
“ Not seen you for simply centuries , ” continued the young man .
“ Where are you off to ?
Come and chew a bun with me .
We ’re getting a bit unpopular here -- blocking the gangway as it were .
Let ’s get out of it . ”
The girl assenting , they started walking down Dover Street towards Piccadilly .
“ Now then , ” said Tommy , “ where shall we go ? ”
The very faint anxiety which underlay his tone did not escape the astute ears of Miss Prudence Cowley , known to her intimate friends for some mysterious reason as “ Tuppence . ”
She pounced at once .
“ Tommy , you ’re stony ! ”
“ Not a bit of it , ” declared Tommy unconvincingly .
“ Rolling in cash . ”
“ You always were a shocking liar , ” said Tuppence severely , “ though you did once persuade Sister Greenbank that the doctor had ordered you beer as a tonic , but forgotten to write it on the chart .
Do you remember ? ”
Tommy chuckled .
“ I should think I did !
Was n’t the old cat in a rage when she found out ?
Not that she was a bad sort really , old Mother Greenbank !
Good old hospital -- demobbed like everything else , I suppose ? ”
Tuppence sighed .
“ Yes .
You too ? ”
Tommy nodded .
“ Two months ago . ”
“ Gratuity ? ” hinted Tuppence .
“ Spent . ”
“ Oh , Tommy ! ”
“ No , old thing , not in riotous dissipation .
No such luck !
The cost of living -- ordinary plain , or garden living nowadays is , I assure you , if you do not know ---- ” “ My dear child , ” interrupted Tuppence , “ there is nothing I do _ not _ know about the cost of living .
Here we are at Lyons ’ , and we will each of us pay for our own .
That ’s it ! ”
And Tuppence led the way upstairs .
The place was full , and they wandered about looking for a table , catching odds and ends of conversation as they did so .
“ And -- do you know , she sat down and _ cried _ when I told her she could n’t have the flat after all . ”
“ It was simply a _ bargain _ , my dear !
Just like the one Mabel Lewis brought from Paris ---- ” “ Funny scraps one does overhear , ” murmured Tommy .
“ I passed two Johnnies in the street to-day talking about some one called Jane Finn .
Did you ever hear such a name ? ”
But at that moment two elderly ladies rose and collected parcels , and Tuppence deftly ensconced herself in one of the vacant seats .
Tommy ordered tea and buns .
Tuppence ordered tea and buttered toast .
“ And mind the tea comes in separate teapots , ” she added severely .
Tommy sat down opposite her .
His bared head revealed a shock of exquisitely slicked-back red hair .
His face was pleasantly ugly -- nondescript , yet unmistakably the face of a gentleman and a sportsman .
His brown suit was well cut , but perilously near the end of its tether .
They were an essentially modern-looking couple as they sat there .
Tuppence had no claim to beauty , but there was character and charm in the elfin lines of her little face , with its determined chin and large , wide-apart grey eyes that looked mistily out from under straight , black brows .
She wore a small bright green toque over her black bobbed hair , and her extremely short and rather shabby skirt revealed a pair of uncommonly dainty ankles .
Her appearance presented a valiant attempt at smartness .
The tea came at last , and Tuppence , rousing herself from a fit of meditation , poured it out .
“ Now then , ” said Tommy , taking a large bite of bun , “ let ’s get up-to-date .
Remember , I have n’t seen you since that time in hospital in 1916 . ”
“ Very well . ”
Tuppence helped herself liberally to buttered toast .
“ Abridged biography of Miss Prudence Cowley , fifth daughter of Archdeacon Cowley of Little Missendell , Suffolk .
Miss Cowley left the delights ( and drudgeries ) of her home life early in the war and came up to London , where she entered an officers ’ hospital .
First month : Washed up six hundred and forty-eight plates every day .
Second month : Promoted to drying aforesaid plates .
Third month : Promoted to peeling potatoes .
Fourth month : Promoted to cutting bread and butter .
Fifth month : Promoted one floor up to duties of wardmaid with mop and pail .
Sixth month : Promoted to waiting at table .
Seventh month : Pleasing appearance and nice manners so striking that am promoted to waiting on the Sisters !
Eighth month : Slight check in career .
Sister Bond ate Sister Westhaven ’s egg !
Grand row !
Wardmaid clearly to blame !
Inattention in such important matters can not be too highly censured .
Mop and pail again !
How are the mighty fallen !
Ninth month : Promoted to sweeping out wards , where I found a friend of my childhood in Lieutenant Thomas Beresford ( bow , Tommy ! )
, whom I had not seen for five long years .
The meeting was affecting !
Tenth month : Reproved by matron for visiting the pictures in company with one of the patients , namely : the aforementioned Lieutenant Thomas Beresford .
Eleventh and twelfth months : Parlourmaid duties resumed with entire success .
At the end of the year left hospital in a blaze of glory .
After that , the talented Miss Cowley drove successively a trade delivery van , a motor-lorry and a general !
The last was the pleasantest .
He was quite a young general ! ”
“ What blighter was that ? ” inquired Tommy .
“ Perfectly sickening the way those brass hats drove from the War Office to the _ Savoy _ , and from the _ Savoy _ to the War Office ! ”
“ I ’ve forgotten his name now , ” confessed Tuppence .
“ To resume , that was in a way the apex of my career .
I next entered a Government office .
We had several very enjoyable tea parties .
I had intended to become a land girl , a postwoman , and a bus conductress by way of rounding off my career -- but the Armistice intervened !
I clung to the office with the true limpet touch for many long months , but , alas , I was combed out at last .
Since then I ’ve been looking for a job .
Now then -- your turn . ”
“ There ’s not so much promotion in mine , ” said Tommy regretfully , “ and a great deal less variety .
I went out to France again , as you know .
Then they sent me to Mesopotamia , and I got wounded for the second time , and went into hospital out there .
Then I got stuck in Egypt till the Armistice happened , kicked my heels there some time longer , and , as I told you , finally got demobbed .
And , for ten long , weary months I ’ve been job hunting !
There are n’t any jobs !
And , if there were , they would n’t give ‘ em to me .
What good am I ?
What do I know about business ?
Nothing . ”
CHAPTER I. Down the Rabbit-Hole Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the bank , and of having nothing to do : once or twice she had peeped into the book her sister was reading , but it had no pictures or conversations in it , ‘ and what is the use of a book , ’ thought Alice ‘ without pictures or conversations ? ’
So she was considering in her own mind ( as well as she could , for the hot day made her feel very sleepy and stupid ) , whether the pleasure of making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and picking the daisies , when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran close by her .
There was nothing so VERY remarkable in that ; nor did Alice think it so VERY much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself , ‘ Oh dear !
Oh dear !
I shall be late ! ’
( when she thought it over afterwards , it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at this , but at the time it all seemed quite natural ) ; but when the Rabbit actually TOOK A WATCH OUT OF ITS WAISTCOAT-POCKET , and looked at it , and then hurried on , Alice started to her feet , for it flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket , or a watch to take out of it , and burning with curiosity , she ran across the field after it , and fortunately was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit-hole under the hedge .
In another moment down went Alice after it , never once considering how in the world she was to get out again .
The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way , and then dipped suddenly down , so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think about stopping herself before she found herself falling down a very deep well .
Either the well was very deep , or she fell very slowly , for she had plenty of time as she went down to look about her and to wonder what was going to happen next .
First , she tried to look down and make out what she was coming to , but it was too dark to see anything ; then she looked at the sides of the well , and noticed that they were filled with cupboards and book-shelves ; here and there she saw maps and pictures hung upon pegs .
She took down a jar from one of the shelves as she passed ; it was labelled ‘ ORANGE MARMALADE ’ , but to her great disappointment it was empty : she did not like to drop the jar for fear of killing somebody , so managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell past it .
‘ Well ! ’
thought Alice to herself , ‘ after such a fall as this , I shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs !
How brave they ’ll all think me at home !
Why , I would n’t say anything about it , even if I fell off the top of the house ! ’
( Which was very likely true . )
Down , down , down .
Would the fall NEVER come to an end !
‘ I wonder how many miles I ’ve fallen by this time ? ’
she said aloud .
‘ I must be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth .
Let me see : that would be four thousand miles down , I think -- ’ ( for , you see , Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in the schoolroom , and though this was not a VERY good opportunity for showing off her knowledge , as there was no one to listen to her , still it was good practice to say it over ) ‘ -- yes , that ’s about the right distance -- but then I wonder what Latitude or Longitude I ’ve got to ? ’
( Alice had no idea what Latitude was , or Longitude either , but thought they were nice grand words to say . )
Presently she began again .
‘ I wonder if I shall fall right THROUGH the earth !
How funny it ’ll seem to come out among the people that walk with their heads downward !
The Antipathies , I think -- ’ ( she was rather glad there WAS no one listening , this time , as it did n’t sound at all the right word ) ‘ -- but I shall have to ask them what the name of the country is , you know .
Please , Ma’am , is this New Zealand or Australia ? ’
( and she tried to curtsey as she spoke -- fancy CURTSEYING as you ’re falling through the air !
Do you think you could manage it ? )
‘ And what an ignorant little girl she ’ll think me for asking !
No , it ’ll never do to ask : perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere . ’
Down , down , down .
There was nothing else to do , so Alice soon began talking again .
‘ Dinah ’ll miss me very much to-night , I should think ! ’
( Dinah was the cat . )
‘ I hope they ’ll remember her saucer of milk at tea-time .
Dinah my dear !
I wish you were down here with me !
There are no mice in the air , I ’m afraid , but you might catch a bat , and that ’s very like a mouse , you know .
But do cats eat bats , I wonder ? ’
And here Alice began to get rather sleepy , and went on saying to herself , in a dreamy sort of way , ‘ Do cats eat bats ?
Do cats eat bats ? ’
and sometimes , ‘ Do bats eat cats ? ’
for , you see , as she could n’t answer either question , it did n’t much matter which way she put it .
She felt that she was dozing off , and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in hand with Dinah , and saying to her very earnestly , ‘ Now , Dinah , tell me the truth : did you ever eat a bat ? ’
when suddenly , thump !
thump !
down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry leaves , and the fall was over .
Alice was not a bit hurt , and she jumped up on to her feet in a moment : she looked up , but it was all dark overhead ; before her was another long passage , and the White Rabbit was still in sight , hurrying down it .
There was not a moment to be lost : away went Alice like the wind , and was just in time to hear it say , as it turned a corner , ‘ Oh my ears and whiskers , how late it ’s getting ! ’
She was close behind it when she turned the corner , but the Rabbit was no longer to be seen : she found herself in a long , low hall , which was lit up by a row of lamps hanging from the roof .
There were doors all round the hall , but they were all locked ; and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other , trying every door , she walked sadly down the middle , wondering how she was ever to get out again .
Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table , all made of solid glass ; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key , and Alice ’s first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall ; but , alas !
either the locks were too large , or the key was too small , but at any rate it would not open any of them .
However , on the second time round , she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before , and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high : she tried the little golden key in the lock , and to her great delight it fitted !
Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage , not much larger than a rat-hole : she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw .
How she longed to get out of that dark hall , and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains , but she could not even get her head through the doorway ; ‘ and even if my head would go through , ’ thought poor Alice , ‘ it would be of very little use without my shoulders .
Oh , how I wish I could shut up like a telescope !
I think I could , if I only knew how to begin . ’
For , you see , so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately , that Alice had begun to think that very few things indeed were really impossible .
There seemed to be no use in waiting by the little door , so she went back to the table , half hoping she might find another key on it , or at any rate a book of rules for shutting people up like telescopes : this time she found a little bottle on it , [ ‘ which certainly was not here before , ’ said Alice , ) and round the neck of the bottle was a paper label , with the words ‘ DRINK ME ’ beautifully printed on it in large letters .
It was all very well to say ‘ Drink me , ’ but the wise little Alice was not going to do THAT in a hurry .
‘ No , I ’ll look first , ’ she said , ‘ and see whether it ’s marked “ poison ” or not ’ ; for she had read several nice little histories about children who had got burnt , and eaten up by wild beasts and other unpleasant things , all because they WOULD not remember the simple rules their friends had taught them : such as , that a red-hot poker will burn you if you hold it too long ; and that if you cut your finger VERY deeply with a knife , it usually bleeds ; and she had never forgotten that , if you drink much from a bottle marked ‘ poison , ’ it is almost certain to disagree with you , sooner or later .
However , this bottle was NOT marked ‘ poison , ’ so Alice ventured to taste it , and finding it very nice , ( it had , in fact , a sort of mixed flavour of cherry-tart , custard , pine-apple , roast turkey , toffee , and hot buttered toast , ) she very soon finished it off .
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ‘ What a curious feeling ! ’
said Alice ; ‘ I must be shutting up like a telescope . ’
And so it was indeed : she was now only ten inches high , and her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into that lovely garden .
First , however , she waited for a few minutes to see if she was going to shrink any further : she felt a little nervous about this ; ‘ for it might end , you know , ’ said Alice to herself , ‘ in my going out altogether , like a candle .
I wonder what I should be like then ? ’
And she tried to fancy what the flame of a candle is like after the candle is blown out , for she could not remember ever having seen such a thing .
CHAPTER I .
The Coming of a Native Son The Happy Family , waiting for the Sunday supper call , were grouped around the open door of the bunk-house , gossiping idly of things purely local , when the Old Man returned from the Stock Association at Helena ; beside him on the buggy seat sat a stranger .
The Old Man pulled up at the bunk-house , the stranger sprang out over the wheel with the agility which bespoke youthful muscles , and the Old Man introduced him with a quirk of the lips : “ This is Mr. Mig-u-ell Rapponi , boys -- a peeler straight from the Golden Gate .
Throw out your war-bag and make yourself to home , Mig-u-ell ; some of the boys 'll show you where to bed down . ”
The Old Man drove on to the house with his own luggage , and Happy Jack followed to take charge of the team ; but the remainder of the Happy Family unobtrusively took the measure of the foreign element .
From his black-and-white horsehair hatband , with tassels that swept to the very edge of his gray hatbrim , to the crimson silk neckerchief draped over the pale blue bosom of his shirt ; from the beautifully stamped leather cuffs , down to the exaggerated height of his tan boot-heels , their critical eyes swept in swift , appraising glances ; and unanimous disapproval was the result .
The Happy Family had themselves an eye to picturesque garb upon occasion , but this passed even Pink 's love of display .
“ He 's some gaudy to look at , ” Irish murmured under his breath to Cal Emmett .
“ All he lacks is a spot-light and a brass band , ” Cal returned , in much the same tone with which a woman remarks upon a last season 's hat on the head of a rival .
Miguel was not embarrassed by the inspection .
He was tall , straight , and swarthily handsome , and he stood with the complacence of a stage favorite waiting for the applause to cease so that he might speak his first lines ; and , while he waited , he sifted tobacco into a cigarette paper daintily , with his little finger extended .
There was a ring upon that finger ; a ring with a moonstone setting as large and round as the eye of a startled cat , and the Happy Family caught the pale gleam of it and drew a long breath .
He lighted a match nonchalantly , by the artfully simple method of pinching the head of it with his fingernails , leaned negligently against the wall of the bunk-house , and regarded the group incuriously while he smoked .
“ Any pretty girls up this way ? ” he inquired languidly , after a moment , fanning a thin smoke-cloud from before his face while he spoke .
The Happy Family went prickly hot .
The girls in that neighborhood were held in esteem , and there was that in his tone which gave offense .
“ Sure , there 's pretty girls here ! ”
Big Medicine bellowed unexpectedly , close beside him .
“ We 're all of us engaged to ` em , by cripes ! ”
Miguel shot an oblique glance at Big Medicine , examined the end of his cigarette , and gave a lift of shoulder , which might mean anything or nothing , and so was irritating to a degree .
He did not pursue the subject further , and so several belated retorts were left tickling futilely the tongues of the Happy Family -- which does not make for amiability .
To a man they liked him little , in spite of their easy friendliness with mankind in general .
At supper they talked with him perfunctorily , and covertly sneered because he sprinkled his food liberally with cayenne and his speech with Spanish words pronounced with soft , slurred vowels that made them sound unfamiliar , and against which his English contrasted sharply with its crisp , American enunciation .
He met their infrequent glances with the cool stare of absolute indifference to their opinion of him , and their perfunctory civility with introspective calm .
The next morning , when there was riding to be done , and Miguel appeared at the last moment in his working clothes , even Weary , the sunny-hearted , had an unmistakable curl of his lip after the first glance .
Miguel wore the hatband , the crimson kerchief tied loosely with the point draped over his chest , the stamped leather cuffs and the tan boots with the highest heels ever built by the cobbler craft .
Also , the lower half of him was incased in chaps the like of which had never before been brought into Flying U coulee .
Black Angora chaps they were ; long-haired , crinkly to the very hide , with three white , diamond-shaped patches running down each leg of them , and with the leather waistband stamped elaborately to match the cuffs .
The bands of his spurs were two inches wide and inlaid to the edge with beaten silver , and each concho was engraved to represent a large , wild rose , with a golden center .
A dollar laid upon the rowels would have left a fringe of prongs all around .
He bent over his sacked riding outfit , and undid it , revealing a wonderful saddle of stamped leather inlaid on skirt and cantle with more beaten silver .
He straightened the skirts , carefully ignoring the glances thrown in his direction , and swore softly to himself when he discovered where the leather had been scratched through the canvas wrappings and the end of the silver scroll ripped up .
He drew out his bridle and shook it into shape , and the silver mountings and the reins of braided leather with horsehair tassels made Happy Jack 's eyes greedy with desire .
His blanket was a scarlet Navajo , and his rope a rawhide lariat .
Altogether , his splendor when he was mounted so disturbed the fine mental poise of the Happy Family that they left him jingling richly off by himself , while they rode closely grouped and discussed him acrimoniously .
“ By gosh , a man might do worse than locate that Native Son for a silver mine , ” Cal began , eyeing the interloper scornfully .
“ It 's plumb wicked to ride around with all that wealth and fussy stuff .
He must ' a ' robbed a bank and put the money all into a riding outfit . ”
“ By golly , he looks to me like a pair uh trays when he comes bow-leggin ' along with them white diamonds on his legs , ” Slim stated solemnly .
“ And I 'll gamble that 's a spot higher than he stacks up in the cow game , ” Pink observed with the pessimism which matrimony had given him .
“ You mind him asking about bad horses , last night ?
That Lizzie-boy never saw a bad horse ; they do n't grow 'em where he come from .
What they do n't know about riding they make up for with a swell rig -- ” “ And , oh , mamma !
It sure is a swell rig ! ”
Weary paid generous tribute .
“ Only I will say old Banjo reminds me of an Irish cook rigged out in silk and diamonds .
That outfit on Glory , now -- ” He sighed enviously .
“ Well , I 've gone up against a few real ones in my long and varied career , ” Irish remarked reminiscently , “ and I 've noticed that a hoss never has any respect or admiration for a swell rig .
When he gets real busy it ai n't the silver filigree stuff that 's going to help you hold connections with your saddle , and a silver-mounted bridle-bit ai n't a darned bit better than a plain one . ”
“ Just take a look at him ! ” cried Pink , with intense disgust .
“ Ambling off there , so the sun can strike all that silver and bounce back in our eyes .
And that braided lariat -- I 'd sure love to see the pieces if he ever tries to anchor anything bigger than a yearling ! ”
“ Why , you do n't think for a minute he could ever get out and rope anything , do yuh ? ”
Irish laughed .
“ That there Native Son throws on a-w-l-together too much dog to really get out and do anything . ”
“ Aw , ” fleered Happy Jack , “ he ai n't any Natiff Son .
He 's a dago ! ”
“ He 's got the earmarks uh both , ” Big Medicine stated authoritatively .
“ I know 'em , by cripes , and I know their ways . ”
He jerked his thumb toward the dazzling Miguel .
“ I can tell yuh the kinda cow-puncher he is ; I 've saw 'em workin ' at it .
Haw-haw-haw !
They 'll start out to move ten or a dozen head uh tame old cows from one field to another , and there 'll be six or eight fellers , rigged up like this here tray-spot , ridin ' along , important as hell , drivin ' them few cows down a lane , with peach trees on both sides , by cripes , jingling their big , silver spurs , all wearin ' fancy chaps to ride four or five miles down the road .
Honest to grandma , they call that punchin ' cows !
Oh , he 's a Native Son , all right .
I 've saw lots of 'em , only I never saw one so far away from the Promised Land before .
That there looks queer to me .
Natiff Sons -- the real ones , like him -- are as scarce outside Calyforny as buffalo are right here in this coulee . ”
“ That 's the way they do it , all right , ” Irish agreed .
“ And then they 'll have a ' rodeo ' -- ” “ Haw-haw-haw ! ”
Big Medicine interrupted , and took up the tale , which might have been entitled “ Some Cowpunching I Have Seen . ”
“ They have them rodeos on a Sunday , mostly , and they invite everybody to it , like it was a picnic .
And there 'll be two or three fellers to every calf , all lit up , like Mig-u-ell , over there , in chaps and silver fixin 's , fussin ' around on horseback in a corral , and every feller trying to pile his rope on the same calf , by cripes !
They stretch 'em out with two ropes -- calves , remember !
Little , weenty fellers you could pack under one arm !
Yuh ca n't blame 'em much .
They never have more 'n thirty or forty head to brand at a time , and they never git more 'n a taste uh real work .
So they make the most uh what they git , and go in heavy on fancy outfits .
And this here silver-mounted fellow thinks he 's a real cowpuncher , by cripes ! ”
The Happy Family laughed at the idea ; laughed so loud that Miguel left his lonely splendor and swung over to them , ostensibly to borrow a match .
“ What 's the joke ? ” he inquired languidly , his chin thrust out and his eyes upon the match blazing at the end of his cigarette .
PART ONE -- The Old Buccaneer 1 The Old Sea-dog at the Admiral Benbow SQUIRE TRELAWNEY , Dr. Livesey , and the rest of these gentlemen having asked me to write down the whole particulars about Treasure Island , from the beginning to the end , keeping nothing back but the bearings of the island , and that only because there is still treasure not yet lifted , I take up my pen in the year of grace 17 __ and go back to the time when my father kept the Admiral Benbow inn and the brown old seaman with the sabre cut first took up his lodging under our roof .
I remember him as if it were yesterday , as he came plodding to the inn door , his sea-chest following behind him in a hand-barrow -- a tall , strong , heavy , nut-brown man , his tarry pigtail falling over the shoulder of his soiled blue coat , his hands ragged and scarred , with black , broken nails , and the sabre cut across one cheek , a dirty , livid white .
I remember him looking round the cover and whistling to himself as he did so , and then breaking out in that old sea-song that he sang so often afterwards : " Fifteen men on the dead man 's chest -- Yo-ho-ho , and a bottle of rum ! "
in the high , old tottering voice that seemed to have been tuned and broken at the capstan bars .
Then he rapped on the door with a bit of stick like a handspike that he carried , and when my father appeared , called roughly for a glass of rum .
This , when it was brought to him , he drank slowly , like a connoisseur , lingering on the taste and still looking about him at the cliffs and up at our signboard .
" This is a handy cove , " says he at length ; " and a pleasant sittyated grog-shop .
Much company , mate ? "
My father told him no , very little company , the more was the pity .
" Well , then , " said he , " this is the berth for me .
Here you , matey , " he cried to the man who trundled the barrow ; " bring up alongside and help up my chest .
I 'll stay here a bit , " he continued .
" I 'm a plain man ; rum and bacon and eggs is what I want , and that head up there for to watch ships off .
What you mought call me ?
You mought call me captain .
Oh , I see what you 're at -- there " ; and he threw down three or four gold pieces on the threshold .
" You can tell me when I 've worked through that , " says he , looking as fierce as a commander .
And indeed bad as his clothes were and coarsely as he spoke , he had none of the appearance of a man who sailed before the mast , but seemed like a mate or skipper accustomed to be obeyed or to strike .
The man who came with the barrow told us the mail had set him down the morning before at the Royal George , that he had inquired what inns there were along the coast , and hearing ours well spoken of , I suppose , and described as lonely , had chosen it from the others for his place of residence .
And that was all we could learn of our guest .
He was a very silent man by custom .
All day he hung round the cove or upon the cliffs with a brass telescope ; all evening he sat in a corner of the parlour next the fire and drank rum and water very strong .
Mostly he would not speak when spoken to , only look up sudden and fierce and blow through his nose like a fog-horn ; and we and the people who came about our house soon learned to let him be .
Every day when he came back from his stroll he would ask if any seafaring men had gone by along the road .
At first we thought it was the want of company of his own kind that made him ask this question , but at last we began to see he was desirous to avoid them .
When a seaman did put up at the Admiral Benbow ( as now and then some did , making by the coast road for Bristol ) he would look in at him through the curtained door before he entered the parlour ; and he was always sure to be as silent as a mouse when any such was present .
For me , at least , there was no secret about the matter , for I was , in a way , a sharer in his alarms .
He had taken me aside one day and promised me a silver fourpenny on the first of every month if I would only keep my " weather-eye open for a seafaring man with one leg " and let him know the moment he appeared .
Often enough when the first of the month came round and I applied to him for my wage , he would only blow through his nose at me and stare me down , but before the week was out he was sure to think better of it , bring me my four-penny piece , and repeat his orders to look out for " the seafaring man with one leg . "
How that personage haunted my dreams , I need scarcely tell you .
On stormy nights , when the wind shook the four corners of the house and the surf roared along the cove and up the cliffs , I would see him in a thousand forms , and with a thousand diabolical expressions .
Now the leg would be cut off at the knee , now at the hip ; now he was a monstrous kind of a creature who had never had but the one leg , and that in the middle of his body .
To see him leap and run and pursue me over hedge and ditch was the worst of nightmares .
And altogether I paid pretty dear for my monthly fourpenny piece , in the shape of these abominable fancies .
But though I was so terrified by the idea of the seafaring man with one leg , I was far less afraid of the captain himself than anybody else who knew him .
There were nights when he took a deal more rum and water than his head would carry ; and then he would sometimes sit and sing his wicked , old , wild sea-songs , minding nobody ; but sometimes he would call for glasses round and force all the trembling company to listen to his stories or bear a chorus to his singing .
Often I have heard the house shaking with " Yo-ho-ho , and a bottle of rum , " all the neighbours joining in for dear life , with the fear of death upon them , and each singing louder than the other to avoid remark .
For in these fits he was the most overriding companion ever known ; he would slap his hand on the table for silence all round ; he would fly up in a passion of anger at a question , or sometimes because none was put , and so he judged the company was not following his story .
Nor would he allow anyone to leave the inn till he had drunk himself sleepy and reeled off to bed .
His stories were what frightened people worst of all .
Dreadful stories they were -- about hanging , and walking the plank , and storms at sea , and the Dry Tortugas , and wild deeds and places on the Spanish Main .
By his own account he must have lived his life among some of the wickedest men that God ever allowed upon the sea , and the language in which he told these stories shocked our plain country people almost as much as the crimes that he described .
My father was always saying the inn would be ruined , for people would soon cease coming there to be tyrannized over and put down , and sent shivering to their beds ; but I really believe his presence did us good .
People were frightened at the time , but on looking back they rather liked it ; it was a fine excitement in a quiet country life , and there was even a party of the younger men who pretended to admire him , calling him a " true sea-dog " and a " real old salt " and such like names , and saying there was the sort of man that made England terrible at sea .
In one way , indeed , he bade fair to ruin us , for he kept on staying week after week , and at last month after month , so that all the money had been long exhausted , and still my father never plucked up the heart to insist on having more .
If ever he mentioned it , the captain blew through his nose so loudly that you might say he roared , and stared my poor father out of the room .
I have seen him wringing his hands after such a rebuff , and I am sure the annoyance and the terror he lived in must have greatly hastened his early and unhappy death .
All the time he lived with us the captain made no change whatever in his dress but to buy some stockings from a hawker .
One of the cocks of his hat having fallen down , he let it hang from that day forth , though it was a great annoyance when it blew .
I remember the appearance of his coat , which he patched himself upstairs in his room , and which , before the end , was nothing but patches .
He never wrote or received a letter , and he never spoke with any but the neighbours , and with these , for the most part , only when drunk on rum .
The great sea-chest none of us had ever seen open .
He was only once crossed , and that was towards the end , when my poor father was far gone in a decline that took him off .
Dr. Livesey came late one afternoon to see the patient , took a bit of dinner from my mother , and went into the parlour to smoke a pipe until his horse should come down from the hamlet , for we had no stabling at the old Benbow .
I followed him in , and I remember observing the contrast the neat , bright doctor , with his powder as white as snow and his bright , black eyes and pleasant manners , made with the coltish country folk , and above all , with that filthy , heavy , bleared scarecrow of a pirate of ours , sitting , far gone in rum , with his arms on the table .
Suddenly he -- the captain , that is -- began to pipe up his eternal song : " Fifteen men on the dead man 's chest -- Yo-ho-ho , and a bottle of rum !
Drink and the devil had done for the rest -- Yo-ho-ho , and a bottle of rum ! "
At first I had supposed " the dead man 's chest " to be that identical big box of his upstairs in the front room , and the thought had been mingled in my nightmares with that of the one-legged seafaring man .
But by this time we had all long ceased to pay any particular notice to the song ; it was new , that night , to nobody but Dr. Livesey , and on him I observed it did not produce an agreeable effect , for he looked up for a moment quite angrily before he went on with his talk to old Taylor , the gardener , on a new cure for the rheumatics .
In the meantime , the captain gradually brightened up at his own music , and at last flapped his hand upon the table before him in a way we all knew to mean silence .
The voices stopped at once , all but Dr. Livesey 's ; he went on as before speaking clear and kind and drawing briskly at his pipe between every word or two .
The captain glared at him for a while , flapped his hand again , glared still harder , and at last broke out with a villainous , low oath , " Silence , there , between decks ! "
CHAPTER I It was a Sunday evening in October , and in common with many other young ladies of her class , Katharine Hilbery was pouring out tea .
Perhaps a fifth part of her mind was thus occupied , and the remaining parts leapt over the little barrier of day which interposed between Monday morning and this rather subdued moment , and played with the things one does voluntarily and normally in the daylight .
But although she was silent , she was evidently mistress of a situation which was familiar enough to her , and inclined to let it take its way for the six hundredth time , perhaps , without bringing into play any of her unoccupied faculties .
A single glance was enough to show that Mrs. Hilbery was so rich in the gifts which make tea-parties of elderly distinguished people successful , that she scarcely needed any help from her daughter , provided that the tiresome business of teacups and bread and butter was discharged for her .
Considering that the little party had been seated round the tea-table for less than twenty minutes , the animation observable on their faces , and the amount of sound they were producing collectively , were very creditable to the hostess .
It suddenly came into Katharine ’s mind that if some one opened the door at this moment he would think that they were enjoying themselves ; he would think , “ What an extremely nice house to come into ! ”
and instinctively she laughed , and said something to increase the noise , for the credit of the house presumably , since she herself had not been feeling exhilarated .
At the very same moment , rather to her amusement , the door was flung open , and a young man entered the room .
Katharine , as she shook hands with him , asked him , in her own mind , “ Now , do you think we ’re enjoying ourselves enormously ? ”
... “ Mr. Denham , mother , ” she said aloud , for she saw that her mother had forgotten his name .
That fact was perceptible to Mr. Denham also , and increased the awkwardness which inevitably attends the entrance of a stranger into a room full of people much at their ease , and all launched upon sentences .
At the same time , it seemed to Mr. Denham as if a thousand softly padded doors had closed between him and the street outside .
A fine mist , the etherealized essence of the fog , hung visibly in the wide and rather empty space of the drawing-room , all silver where the candles were grouped on the tea-table , and ruddy again in the firelight .
With the omnibuses and cabs still running in his head , and his body still tingling with his quick walk along the streets and in and out of traffic and foot-passengers , this drawing-room seemed very remote and still ; and the faces of the elderly people were mellowed , at some distance from each other , and had a bloom on them owing to the fact that the air in the drawing-room was thickened by blue grains of mist .
Mr. Denham had come in as Mr. Fortescue , the eminent novelist , reached the middle of a very long sentence .
He kept this suspended while the newcomer sat down , and Mrs. Hilbery deftly joined the severed parts by leaning towards him and remarking : “ Now , what would you do if you were married to an engineer , and had to live in Manchester , Mr. Denham ? ”
“ Surely she could learn Persian , ” broke in a thin , elderly gentleman .
“ Is there no retired schoolmaster or man of letters in Manchester with whom she could read Persian ? ”
“ A cousin of ours has married and gone to live in Manchester , ” Katharine explained .
Mr. Denham muttered something , which was indeed all that was required of him , and the novelist went on where he had left off .
Privately , Mr. Denham cursed himself very sharply for having exchanged the freedom of the street for this sophisticated drawing-room , where , among other disagreeables , he certainly would not appear at his best .
He glanced round him , and saw that , save for Katharine , they were all over forty , the only consolation being that Mr. Fortescue was a considerable celebrity , so that to-morrow one might be glad to have met him .
“ Have you ever been to Manchester ? ”
he asked Katharine .
“ Never , ” she replied .
“ Why do you object to it , then ? ”
Katharine stirred her tea , and seemed to speculate , so Denham thought , upon the duty of filling somebody else ’s cup , but she was really wondering how she was going to keep this strange young man in harmony with the rest .
She observed that he was compressing his teacup , so that there was danger lest the thin china might cave inwards .
She could see that he was nervous ; one would expect a bony young man with his face slightly reddened by the wind , and his hair not altogether smooth , to be nervous in such a party .
Further , he probably disliked this kind of thing , and had come out of curiosity , or because her father had invited him -- anyhow , he would not be easily combined with the rest .
“ I should think there would be no one to talk to in Manchester , ” she replied at random .
Mr. Fortescue had been observing her for a moment or two , as novelists are inclined to observe , and at this remark he smiled , and made it the text for a little further speculation .
“ In spite of a slight tendency to exaggeration , Katharine decidedly hits the mark , ” he said , and lying back in his chair , with his opaque contemplative eyes fixed on the ceiling , and the tips of his fingers pressed together , he depicted , first the horrors of the streets of Manchester , and then the bare , immense moors on the outskirts of the town , and then the scrubby little house in which the girl would live , and then the professors and the miserable young students devoted to the more strenuous works of our younger dramatists , who would visit her , and how her appearance would change by degrees , and how she would fly to London , and how Katharine would have to lead her about , as one leads an eager dog on a chain , past rows of clamorous butchers ’ shops , poor dear creature .
“ Oh , Mr. Fortescue , ” exclaimed Mrs. Hilbery , as he finished , “ I had just written to say how I envied her !
I was thinking of the big gardens and the dear old ladies in mittens , who read nothing but the “ Spectator , ” and snuff the candles .
Have they ALL disappeared ?
I told her she would find the nice things of London without the horrid streets that depress one so . ”
“ There is the University , ” said the thin gentleman , who had previously insisted upon the existence of people knowing Persian .
“ I know there are moors there , because I read about them in a book the other day , ” said Katharine .
“ I am grieved and amazed at the ignorance of my family , ” Mr. Hilbery remarked .
He was an elderly man , with a pair of oval , hazel eyes which were rather bright for his time of life , and relieved the heaviness of his face .
He played constantly with a little green stone attached to his watch-chain , thus displaying long and very sensitive fingers , and had a habit of moving his head hither and thither very quickly without altering the position of his large and rather corpulent body , so that he seemed to be providing himself incessantly with food for amusement and reflection with the least possible expenditure of energy .
One might suppose that he had passed the time of life when his ambitions were personal , or that he had gratified them as far as he was likely to do , and now employed his considerable acuteness rather to observe and reflect than to attain any result .
Katharine , so Denham decided , while Mr. Fortescue built up another rounded structure of words , had a likeness to each of her parents , but these elements were rather oddly blended .
She had the quick , impulsive movements of her mother , the lips parting often to speak , and closing again ; and the dark oval eyes of her father brimming with light upon a basis of sadness , or , since she was too young to have acquired a sorrowful point of view , one might say that the basis was not sadness so much as a spirit given to contemplation and self-control .
Judging by her hair , her coloring , and the shape of her features , she was striking , if not actually beautiful .
Decision and composure stamped her , a combination of qualities that produced a very marked character , and one that was not calculated to put a young man , who scarcely knew her , at his ease .
For the rest , she was tall ; her dress was of some quiet color , with old yellow-tinted lace for ornament , to which the spark of an ancient jewel gave its one red gleam .
Denham noticed that , although silent , she kept sufficient control of the situation to answer immediately her mother appealed to her for help , and yet it was obvious to him that she attended only with the surface skin of her mind .
It struck him that her position at the tea-table , among all these elderly people , was not without its difficulties , and he checked his inclination to find her , or her attitude , generally antipathetic to him .
The talk had passed over Manchester , after dealing with it very generously .
“ Would it be the Battle of Trafalgar or the Spanish Armada , Katharine ? ”
her mother demanded .
“ Trafalgar , mother . ”
“ Trafalgar , of course !
How stupid of me !
Another cup of tea , with a thin slice of lemon in it , and then , dear Mr. Fortescue , please explain my absurd little puzzle .
One ca n’t help believing gentlemen with Roman noses , even if one meets them in omnibuses . ”
Mr. Hilbery here interposed so far as Denham was concerned , and talked a great deal of sense about the solicitors ’ profession , and the changes which he had seen in his lifetime .
Indeed , Denham properly fell to his lot , owing to the fact that an article by Denham upon some legal matter , published by Mr. Hilbery in his Review , had brought them acquainted .
But when a moment later Mrs. Sutton Bailey was announced , he turned to her , and Mr. Denham found himself sitting silent , rejecting possible things to say , beside Katharine , who was silent too .
Being much about the same age and both under thirty , they were prohibited from the use of a great many convenient phrases which launch conversation into smooth waters .
They were further silenced by Katharine ’s rather malicious determination not to help this young man , in whose upright and resolute bearing she detected something hostile to her surroundings , by any of the usual feminine amenities .
They therefore sat silent , Denham controlling his desire to say something abrupt and explosive , which should shock her into life .
But Mrs. Hilbery was immediately sensitive to any silence in the drawing-room , as of a dumb note in a sonorous scale , and leaning across the table she observed , in the curiously tentative detached manner which always gave her phrases the likeness of butterflies flaunting from one sunny spot to another , “ D’you know , Mr. Denham , you remind me so much of dear Mr. Ruskin ... .
Is it his tie , Katharine , or his hair , or the way he sits in his chair ?
Do tell me , Mr. Denham , are you an admirer of Ruskin ?
Some one , the other day , said to me , ‘ Oh , no , we do n’t read Ruskin , Mrs. Hilbery . ’
What DO you read , I wonder ?
-- for you ca n’t spend all your time going up in aeroplanes and burrowing into the bowels of the earth . ”
CHAPTER I There was no possibility of taking a walk that day .
We had been wandering , indeed , in the leafless shrubbery an hour in the morning ; but since dinner ( Mrs. Reed , when there was no company , dined early ) the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so sombre , and a rain so penetrating , that further out-door exercise was now out of the question .
I was glad of it : I never liked long walks , especially on chilly afternoons : dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilight , with nipped fingers and toes , and a heart saddened by the chidings of Bessie , the nurse , and humbled by the consciousness of my physical inferiority to Eliza , John , and Georgiana Reed .
The said Eliza , John , and Georgiana were now clustered round their mama in the drawing-room : she lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside , and with her darlings about her ( for the time neither quarrelling nor crying ) looked perfectly happy .
Me , she had dispensed from joining the group ; saying , " She regretted to be under the necessity of keeping me at a distance ; but that until she heard from Bessie , and could discover by her own observation , that I was endeavouring in good earnest to acquire a more sociable and childlike disposition , a more attractive and sprightly manner -- something lighter , franker , more natural , as it were -- she really must exclude me from privileges intended only for contented , happy , little children . "
" What does Bessie say I have done ? "
I asked .
" Jane , I do n't like cavillers or questioners ; besides , there is something truly forbidding in a child taking up her elders in that manner .
Be seated somewhere ; and until you can speak pleasantly , remain silent . "
A breakfast-room adjoined the drawing-room , I slipped in there .
It contained a bookcase : I soon possessed myself of a volume , taking care that it should be one stored with pictures .
I mounted into the window - seat : gathering up my feet , I sat cross-legged , like a Turk ; and , having drawn the red moreen curtain nearly close , I was shrined in double retirement .
Folds of scarlet drapery shut in my view to the right hand ; to the left were the clear panes of glass , protecting , but not separating me from the drear November day .
At intervals , while turning over the leaves of my book , I studied the aspect of that winter afternoon .
Afar , it offered a pale blank of mist and cloud ; near a scene of wet lawn and storm-beat shrub , with ceaseless rain sweeping away wildly before a long and lamentable blast .
I returned to my book -- Bewick 's History of British Birds : the letterpress thereof I cared little for , generally speaking ; and yet there were certain introductory pages that , child as I was , I could not pass quite as a blank .
They were those which treat of the haunts of sea-fowl ; of " the solitary rocks and promontories " by them only inhabited ; of the coast of Norway , studded with isles from its southern extremity , the Lindeness , or Naze , to the North Cape -- " Where the Northern Ocean , in vast whirls , Boils round the naked , melancholy isles Of farthest Thule ; and the Atlantic surge Pours in among the stormy Hebrides . "
Nor could I pass unnoticed the suggestion of the bleak shores of Lapland , Siberia , Spitzbergen , Nova Zembla , Iceland , Greenland , with " the vast sweep of the Arctic Zone , and those forlorn regions of dreary space , -- that reservoir of frost and snow , where firm fields of ice , the accumulation of centuries of winters , glazed in Alpine heights above heights , surround the pole , and concentre the multiplied rigours of extreme cold . "
Of these death-white realms I formed an idea of my own : shadowy , like all the half-comprehended notions that float dim through children 's brains , but strangely impressive .
The words in these introductory pages connected themselves with the succeeding vignettes , and gave significance to the rock standing up alone in a sea of billow and spray ; to the broken boat stranded on a desolate coast ; to the cold and ghastly moon glancing through bars of cloud at a wreck just sinking .
I can not tell what sentiment haunted the quite solitary churchyard , with its inscribed headstone ; its gate , its two trees , its low horizon , girdled by a broken wall , and its newly-risen crescent , attesting the hour of eventide .
The two ships becalmed on a torpid sea , I believed to be marine phantoms .
The fiend pinning down the thief 's pack behind him , I passed over quickly : it was an object of terror .
So was the black horned thing seated aloof on a rock , surveying a distant crowd surrounding a gallows .
Each picture told a story ; mysterious often to my undeveloped understanding and imperfect feelings , yet ever profoundly interesting : as interesting as the tales Bessie sometimes narrated on winter evenings , when she chanced to be in good humour ; and when , having brought her ironing-table to the nursery hearth , she allowed us to sit about it , and while she got up Mrs. Reed 's lace frills , and crimped her nightcap borders , fed our eager attention with passages of love and adventure taken from old fairy tales and other ballads ; or ( as at a later period I discovered ) from the pages of Pamela , and Henry , Earl of Moreland .
With Bewick on my knee , I was then happy : happy at least in my way .
I feared nothing but interruption , and that came too soon .
The breakfast - room door opened .
" Boh !
Madam Mope ! "
cried the voice of John Reed ; then he paused : he found the room apparently empty .
" Where the dickens is she ! "
he continued .
" Lizzy !
Georgy !
( calling to his sisters ) Joan is not here : tell mama she is run out into the rain -- bad animal ! "
" It is well I drew the curtain , " thought I ; and I wished fervently he might not discover my hiding-place : nor would John Reed have found it out himself ; he was not quick either of vision or conception ; but Eliza just put her head in at the door , and said at once -- " She is in the window-seat , to be sure , Jack . "
And I came out immediately , for I trembled at the idea of being dragged forth by the said Jack .
" What do you want ? "
I asked , with awkward diffidence .
" Say , ' What do you want , Master Reed ? ' "
was the answer .
" I want you to come here ; " and seating himself in an arm-chair , he intimated by a gesture that I was to approach and stand before him .
John Reed was a schoolboy of fourteen years old ; four years older than I , for I was but ten : large and stout for his age , with a dingy and unwholesome skin ; thick lineaments in a spacious visage , heavy limbs and large extremities .
He gorged himself habitually at table , which made him bilious , and gave him a dim and bleared eye and flabby cheeks .
He ought now to have been at school ; but his mama had taken him home for a month or two , " on account of his delicate health . "
Mr. Miles , the master , affirmed that he would do very well if he had fewer cakes and sweetmeats sent him from home ; but the mother 's heart turned from an opinion so harsh , and inclined rather to the more refined idea that John 's sallowness was owing to over-application and , perhaps , to pining after home .
John had not much affection for his mother and sisters , and an antipathy to me .
He bullied and punished me ; not two or three times in the week , nor once or twice in the day , but continually : every nerve I had feared him , and every morsel of flesh in my bones shrank when he came near .
There were moments when I was bewildered by the terror he inspired , because I had no appeal whatever against either his menaces or his inflictions ; the servants did not like to offend their young master by taking my part against him , and Mrs. Reed was blind and deaf on the subject : she never saw him strike or heard him abuse me , though he did both now and then in her very presence , more frequently , however , behind her back .
Habitually obedient to John , I came up to his chair : he spent some three minutes in thrusting out his tongue at me as far as he could without damaging the roots : I knew he would soon strike , and while dreading the blow , I mused on the disgusting and ugly appearance of him who would presently deal it .
I wonder if he read that notion in my face ; for , all at once , without speaking , he struck suddenly and strongly .
I tottered , and on regaining my equilibrium retired back a step or two from his chair .
" That is for your impudence in answering mama awhile since , " said he , " and for your sneaking way of getting behind curtains , and for the look you had in your eyes two minutes since , you rat ! "
Accustomed to John Reed 's abuse , I never had an idea of replying to it ; my care was how to endure the blow which would certainly follow the insult .
" What were you doing behind the curtain ? "
he asked .
" I was reading . "
" Show the book . "
I returned to the window and fetched it thence .
" You have no business to take our books ; you are a dependent , mama says ; you have no money ; your father left you none ; you ought to beg , and not to live here with gentlemen 's children like us , and eat the same meals we do , and wear clothes at our mama 's expense .
Now , I 'll teach you to rummage my bookshelves : for they _ are _ mine ; all the house belongs to me , or will do in a few years .
Go and stand by the door , out of the way of the mirror and the windows . "
I did so , not at first aware what was his intention ; but when I saw him lift and poise the book and stand in act to hurl it , I instinctively started aside with a cry of alarm : not soon enough , however ; the volume was flung , it hit me , and I fell , striking my head against the door and cutting it .
The cut bled , the pain was sharp : my terror had passed its climax ; other feelings succeeded .
I MAKING GOOD WITH MOTHER When men began to build cities vertically instead of horizontally there passed from our highways a picturesque figure , and from our language an expressive figure of speech .
That oily-tongued , persuasive , soft-stepping stranger in the rusty Prince Albert and the black string tie who had been wont to haunt our back steps and front offices with his carefully wrapped bundle , retreated in bewildered defeat before the clanging blows of steel on steel that meant the erection of the first twenty-story skyscraper .
" As slick , " we used to say , " as a lightning-rod agent . "
Of what use his wares on a building whose tower was robed in clouds and which used the chain lightning for a necklace ?
The Fourth Avenue antique dealer had another curio to add to his collection of andirons , knockers , snuff boxes and warming pans .
But even as this quaint figure vanished there sprang up a new and glittering one to take his place .
He stood framed in the great plate-glass window of the very building which had brought about the defeat of his predecessor .
A miracle of close shaving his face was , and a marvel of immaculateness his linen .
Dapper he was , and dressy , albeit inclined to glittering effects and a certain plethory at the back of the neck .
Back of him stood shining shapes that reflected his glory in enamel , and brass , and glass .
His language was floral , but choice ; his talk was of gearings and bearings and cylinders and magnetos ; his method differed from that of him who went before as the method of a skilled aëronaut differs from that of the man who goes over Niagara in a barrel .
And as he multiplied and spread over the land we coined a new figure of speech .
" Smooth ! " we chuckled .
" As smooth as an automobile salesman . "
But even as we listened , fascinated by his fluent verbiage there grew within us a certain resentment .
Familiarity with his glittering wares bred a contempt of them , so that he fell to speaking of them as necessities instead of luxuries .
He juggled figures , and thought nothing of four of them in a row .
We looked at our five-thousand-dollar salary , so strangely shrunken and thin now , and even as we looked we saw that the method of the unctuous , anxious stranger had become antiquated in its turn .
Then from his ashes emerged a new being .
Neither urger nor spellbinder he .
The twentieth century was stamped across his brow , and on his lips was ever the word " Service . "
Silent , courteous , watchful , alert , he listened , while you talked .
His method , in turn , made that of the silk-lined salesman sound like the hoarse hoots of the ballyhoo man at a county fair .
Blithely he accepted five hundred thousand dollars and gave in return -- a promise .
And when we would search our soul for a synonym to express all that was low-voiced , and suave , and judicious , and patient , and sure , we began to say , " As alert as an advertising expert . "
Jock McChesney , looking as fresh and clear-eyed as only twenty-one and a cold shower can make one look , stood in the doorway of his mother 's bedroom .
His toilette had halted abruptly at the bathrobe stage .
One of those bulky garments swathed his slim figure , while over his left arm hung a gray tweed Norfolk coat .
From his right hand dangled a pair of trousers , in pattern a modish black-and-white .
Jock regarded the gray garment on his arm with moody eyes .
" Well , I 'd like to know what 's the matter with it ! " he demanded , a trifle irritably .
Emma McChesney , in the act of surveying her back hair in the mirror , paused , hand glass poised half way , to regard her son .
" All right , " she answered cheerfully .
" I 'll tell you .
It 's too young . "
" Young ! "
He held it at arm 's length and stared at it .
" What d'you mean -- young ? "
Emma McChesney came forward , wrapping the folds of her kimono about her .
She took the disputed garment in one hand and held it aloft .
" I know that you look like a man on a magazine cover in it .
But Norfolk suits spell tennis , and seashore , and elegant leisure .
And you 're going out this morning , Son , to interview business men .
You 're going to try to impress the advertising world with the fact that it needs your expert services .
You walk into a business office in a Norfolk suit , and everybody from the office boy to the president of the company will ask you what your score is . "
She tossed it back over his arm .
" I 'll wear the black and white , " said Jock resignedly , and turned toward his own room .
At his doorway he paused and raised his voice slightly : " For that matter , they 're looking for young men .
Everybody 's young .
Why , the biggest men in the advertising game are just kids . "
He disappeared within his room , still talking .
" Look at McQuirk , advertising manager of the Combs Car Company .
He 's so young he has to disguise himself in bone-trimmed eye-glasses with a black ribbon to get away with it .
Look at Hopper , of the Berg , Shriner Company .
Pulls down ninety thousand a year , and if he 's thirty-five I 'll -- " " Well , you asked my advice , " interrupted his mother 's voice with that muffled effect which is caused by a skirt being slipped over the head , " and I gave it .
Wear a white duck sailor suit with blue anchors and carry a red tin pail and a shovel , if you want to look young .
Only get into it in a jiffy , Son , because breakfast will be ready in ten minutes .
I can tell by the way Annie 's crashing the cups .
So step lively if you want to pay your lovely mother 's subway fare . "
Ten minutes later the slim young figure , in its English-fitting black and white , sat opposite Emma McChesney at the breakfast table and between excited gulps of coffee outlined a meteoric career in his chosen field .
And the more he talked and the rosier his figures of speech became , the more silent and thoughtful fell his mother .
She wondered if five o'clock would find a droop to the set of those young shoulders ; if the springy young legs in their absurdly scant modish trousers would have lost some of their elasticity ; if the buoyant step in the flat-heeled shoes would not drag a little .
Thirteen years of business experience had taught her to swallow smilingly the bitter pill of rebuff .
But this boy was to experience his first dose to-day .
She felt again that sensation of almost physical nausea -- that sickness of heart and spirit which had come over her when she had met her first sneer and intolerant shrug .
It had been her maiden trip on the road for the T.A. Buck Featherloom Petticoat Company .
She was secretary of that company now , and moving spirit in its policy .
But the wound of that first insult still ached .
A word from her would have placed the boy and saved him from curt refusals .
She withheld that word .
He must fight his fight alone .
" I want to write the kind of ad , " Jock was saying excitedly , " that you see 'em staring at in the subways , and street cars and L-trains .
I want to sit across the aisle and watch their up-turned faces staring at that oblong , and reading it aloud to each other . "
" Is n't that an awfully obvious necktie you 're wearing , Jock ? " inquired his mother irrelevantly .
" This ?
You ought to see some of them .
This is a Quaker stock in comparison . "
He glanced down complacently at the vivid-hued silken scarf that the season 's mode demanded .
Immediately he was off again .
" And the first thing you know , Mrs. McChesney , ma'am , we 'll have a motor truck backing up at the door once a month and six strong men carrying my salary to the freight elevator in sacks . "
Emma McChesney buttered her bit of toast , then looked up to remark quietly : " Had n't you better qualify for the trial heats , Jock , before you jump into the finals ? "
" Trial heats ! " sneered Jock .
" They 're poky .
I want real money .
Now !
It is n't enough to be just well-to-do in these days .
It needs money .
I want to be rich !
Not just prosperous , but rich !
So rich that I can let the bath soap float around in the water without any pricks of conscience .
So successful that they 'll say , ' And he 's a mere boy , too .
Imagine ! ' "
And , " Jock dear , " Emma McChesney said , " you 've still to learn that plans and ambitions are like soap bubbles .
The harder you blow and the more you inflate them , the quicker they burst .
Plans and ambitions are things to be kept locked away in your heart , Son , with no one but yourself to take an occasional peep at them . "
Jock leaned over the table , with his charming smile .
" You 're a jealous blonde , " he laughed .
" Because I 'm going to be a captain of finance -- an advertising wizard ; you 're afraid I 'll grab the glory all away from you . "
[ Illustration : " ' You 're a jealous blond , ' he said " ] Mrs. McChesney folded her napkin and rose .
She looked unbelievably young , and trim , and radiant , to be the mother of this boasting boy .
" I 'm not afraid , " she drawled , a wicked little glint in her blue eyes .
" You see , they 'll only regard your feats and say , ' H 'm , no wonder .
He ought to be able to sell ice to an Eskimo .
His mother was Emma McChesney . ' "
And then , being a modern mother , she donned smart autumn hat and tailored suit coat and stood ready to reach her office by nine-thirty .
But because she was as motherly as she was modern she swung open the door between kitchen and dining-room to advise with Annie , the adept .
" Lamb chops to-night , eh , Annie ?
And sweet potatoes .
Jock loves 'em .
And corn au gratin and some head lettuce . "
She glanced toward Jock in the hallway , then lowered her voice .
" Annie , " she teased , " just give us one of your peach cobblers , will you ?
You see he -- he 's going to be awfully -- tired when he gets home . "
May 7th .
-- I love my garden .
I am writing in it now in the late afternoon loveliness , much interrupted by the mosquitoes and the temptation to look at all the glories of the new green leaves washed half an hour ago in a cold shower .
Two owls are perched near me , and are carrying on a long conversation that I enjoy as much as any warbling of nightingales .
The gentleman owl says [ [ musical notes occur here in the printed text ] ] , and she answers from her tree a little way off , [ [ musical notes ] ] , beautifully assenting to and completing her lord ’s remark , as becomes a properly constructed German she-owl .
They say the same thing over and over again so emphatically that I think it must be something nasty about me ; but I shall not let myself be frightened away by the sarcasm of owls .
This is less a garden than a wilderness .
No one has lived in the house , much less in the garden , for twenty-five years , and it is such a pretty old place that the people who might have lived here and did not , deliberately preferring the horrors of a flat in a town , must have belonged to that vast number of eyeless and earless persons of whom the world seems chiefly composed .
Noseless too , though it does not sound pretty ; but the greater part of my spring happiness is due to the scent of the wet earth and young leaves .
I am always happy ( out of doors be it understood , for indoors there are servants and furniture ) but in quite different ways , and my spring happiness bears no resemblance to my summer or autumn happiness , though it is not more intense , and there were days last winter when I danced for sheer joy out in my frost-bound garden , in spite of my years and children .
But I did it behind a bush , having a due regard for the decencies .
There are so many bird-cherries round me , great trees with branches sweeping the grass , and they are so wreathed just now with white blossoms and tenderest green that the garden looks like a wedding .
I never saw such masses of them ; they seemed to fill the place .
Even across a little stream that bounds the garden on the east , and right in the middle of the cornfield beyond , there is an immense one , a picture of grace and glory against the cold blue of the spring sky .
My garden is surrounded by cornfields and meadows , and beyond are great stretches of sandy heath and pine forests , and where the forests leave off the bare heath begins again ; but the forests are beautiful in their lofty , pink-stemmed vastness , far overhead the crowns of softest gray-green , and underfoot a bright green wortleberry carpet , and everywhere the breathless silence ; and the bare heaths are beautiful too , for one can see across them into eternity almost , and to go out on to them with one ’s face towards the setting sun is like going into the very presence of God .
In the middle of this plain is the oasis of birdcherries and greenery where I spend my happy days , and in the middle of the oasis is the gray stone house with many gables where I pass my reluctant nights .
The house is very old , and has been added to at various times .
It was a convent before the Thirty Years ’ War , and the vaulted chapel , with its brick floor worn by pious peasant knees , is now used as a hall .
Gustavus Adolphus and his Swedes passed through more than once , as is duly recorded in archives still preserved , for we are on what was then the high-road between Sweden and Brandenburg the unfortunate .
The Lion of the North was no doubt an estimable person and acted wholly up to his convictions , but he must have sadly upset the peaceful nuns , who were not without convictions of their own , sending them out on to the wide , empty plain to piteously seek some life to replace the life of silence here .
From nearly all the windows of the house I can look out across the plain , with no obstacle in the shape of a hill , right away to a blue line of distant forest , and on the west side uninterruptedly to the setting sun -- nothing but a green , rolling plain , with a sharp edge against the sunset .
I love those west windows better than any others , and have chosen my bedroom on that side of the house so that even times of hair-brushing may not be entirely lost , and the young woman who attends to such matters has been taught to fulfil her duties about a mistress recumbent in an easychair before an open window , and not to profane with chatter that sweet and solemn time .
This girl is grieved at my habit of living almost in the garden , and all her ideas as to the sort of life a respectable German lady should lead have got into a sad muddle since she came to me .
The people round about are persuaded that I am , to put it as kindly as possible , exceedingly eccentric , for the news has travelled that I spend the day out of doors with a book , and that no mortal eye has ever yet seen me sew or cook .
But why cook when you can get some one to cook for you ?
And as for sewing , the maids will hem the sheets better and quicker than I could , and all forms of needlework of the fancy order are inventions of the evil one for keeping the foolish from applying their heart to wisdom .
We had been married five years before it struck us that we might as well make use of this place by coming down and living in it .
Those five years were spent in a flat in a town , and during their whole interminable length I was perfectly miserable and perfectly healthy , which disposes of the ugly notion that has at times disturbed me that my happiness here is less due to the garden than to a good digestion .
And while we were wasting our lives there , here was this dear place with dandelions up to the very door , all the paths grass-grown and completely effaced , in winter so lonely , with nobody but the north wind taking the least notice of it , and in May -- in all those five lovely Mays -- no one to look at the wonderful bird-cherries and still more wonderful masses of lilacs , everything glowing and blowing , the virginia creeper madder every year , until at last , in October , the very roof was wreathed with blood-red tresses , the owls and the squirrels and all the blessed little birds reigning supreme , and not a living creature ever entering the empty house except the snakes , which got into the habit during those silent years of wriggling up the south wall into the rooms on that side whenever the old housekeeper opened the windows .
All that was here , -- peace , and happiness , and a reasonable life , -- and yet it never struck me to come and live in it .
Looking back I am astonished , and can in no way account for the tardiness of my discovery that here , in this far-away corner , was my kingdom of heaven .
Indeed , so little did it enter my head to even use the place in summer , that I submitted to weeks of seaside life with all its horrors every year ; until at last , in the early spring of last year , having come down for the opening of the village school , and wandering out afterwards into the bare and desolate garden , I do n’t know what smell of wet earth or rotting leaves brought back my childhood with a rush and all the happy days I had spent in a garden .
Shall I ever forget that day ?
It was the beginning of my real life , my coming of age as it were , and entering into my kingdom .
Early March , gray , quiet skies , and brown , quiet earth ; leafless and sad and lonely enough out there in the damp and silence , yet there I stood feeling the same rapture of pure delight in the first breath of spring that I used to as a child , and the five wasted years fell from me like a cloak , and the world was full of hope , and I vowed myself then and there to nature , and have been happy ever since .
My other half being indulgent , and with some faint thought perhaps that it might be as well to look after the place , consented to live in it at any rate for a time ; whereupon followed six specially blissful weeks from the end of April into June , during which I was here alone , supposed to be superintending the painting and papering , but as a matter of fact only going into the house when the workmen had gone out of it .
How happy I was !
I do n’t remember any time quite so perfect since the days when I was too little to do lessons and was turned out with sugar on my eleven o’clock bread and butter on to a lawn closely strewn with dandelions and daisies .
The sugar on the bread and butter has lost its charm , but I love the dandelions and daisies even more passionately now than then , and never would endure to see them all mown away if I were not certain that in a day or two they would be pushing up their little faces again as jauntily as ever .
During those six weeks I lived in a world of dandelions and delights .
The dandelions carpeted the three lawns , -- they used to be lawns , but have long since blossomed out into meadows filled with every sort of pretty weed , -- and under and among the groups of leafless oaks and beeches were blue hepaticas , white anemones , violets , and celandines in sheets .
The celandines in particular delighted me with their clean , happy brightness , so beautifully trim and newly varnished , as though they too had had the painters at work on them .
Then , when the anemones went , came a few stray periwinkles and Solomon ’s Seal , and all the birdcherries blossomed in a burst .
And then , before I had a little got used to the joy of their flowers against the sky , came the lilacs -- masses and masses of them , in clumps on the grass , with other shrubs and trees by the side of walks , and one great continuous bank of them half a mile long right past the west front of the house , away down as far as one could see , shining glorious against a background of firs .
When that time came , and when , before it was over , the acacias all blossomed too , and four great clumps of pale , silvery-pink peonies flowered under the south windows , I felt so absolutely happy , and blest , and thankful , and grateful , that I really can not describe it .
My days seemed to melt away in a dream of pink and purple peace .
Chapter 1 It is a truth universally acknowledged , that a single man in possession of a good fortune , must be in want of a wife .
However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on his first entering a neighbourhood , this truth is so well fixed in the minds of the surrounding families , that he is considered the rightful property of some one or other of their daughters .
“ My dear Mr. Bennet , ” said his lady to him one day , “ have you heard that Netherfield Park is let at last ? ”
Mr. Bennet replied that he had not .
“ But it is , ” returned she ; “ for Mrs. Long has just been here , and she told me all about it . ”
Mr. Bennet made no answer .
“ Do you not want to know who has taken it ? ”
cried his wife impatiently .
“ _ You _ want to tell me , and I have no objection to hearing it . ”
This was invitation enough .
“ Why , my dear , you must know , Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is taken by a young man of large fortune from the north of England ; that he came down on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place , and was so much delighted with it , that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately ; that he is to take possession before Michaelmas , and some of his servants are to be in the house by the end of next week . ”
“ What is his name ? ”
“ Bingley . ”
“ Is he married or single ? ”
“ Oh !
Single , my dear , to be sure !
A single man of large fortune ; four or five thousand a year .
What a fine thing for our girls ! ”
“ How so ?
How can it affect them ? ”
“ My dear Mr. Bennet , ” replied his wife , “ how can you be so tiresome !
You must know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them . ”
“ Is that his design in settling here ? ”
“ Design !
Nonsense , how can you talk so !
But it is very likely that he _ may _ fall in love with one of them , and therefore you must visit him as soon as he comes . ”
“ I see no occasion for that .
You and the girls may go , or you may send them by themselves , which perhaps will be still better , for as you are as handsome as any of them , Mr. Bingley may like you the best of the party . ”
“ My dear , you flatter me .
I certainly _ have _ had my share of beauty , but I do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now .
When a woman has five grown-up daughters , she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty . ”
“ In such cases , a woman has not often much beauty to think of . ”
“ But , my dear , you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes into the neighbourhood . ”
“ It is more than I engage for , I assure you . ”
“ But consider your daughters .
Only think what an establishment it would be for one of them .
Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined to go , merely on that account , for in general , you know , they visit no newcomers .
Indeed you must go , for it will be impossible for _ us _ to visit him if you do not . ”
“ You are over-scrupulous , surely .
I dare say Mr. Bingley will be very glad to see you ; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of my hearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls ; though I must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy . ”
“ I desire you will do no such thing .
Lizzy is not a bit better than the others ; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane , nor half so good-humoured as Lydia .
But you are always giving _ her _ the preference . ”
“ They have none of them much to recommend them , ” replied he ; “ they are all silly and ignorant like other girls ; but Lizzy has something more of quickness than her sisters . ”
“ Mr. Bennet , how _ can _ you abuse your own children in such a way ?
You take delight in vexing me .
You have no compassion for my poor nerves . ”
“ You mistake me , my dear .
I have a high respect for your nerves .
They are my old friends .
I have heard you mention them with consideration these last twenty years at least . ”
“ Ah , you do not know what I suffer . ”
“ But I hope you will get over it , and live to see many young men of four thousand a year come into the neighbourhood . ”
“ It will be no use to us , if twenty such should come , since you will not visit them . ”
“ Depend upon it , my dear , that when there are twenty , I will visit them all . ”
Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts , sarcastic humour , reserve , and caprice , that the experience of three-and-twenty years had been insufficient to make his wife understand his character .
_ Her _ mind was less difficult to develop .
She was a woman of mean understanding , little information , and uncertain temper .
When she was discontented , she fancied herself nervous .
The business of her life was to get her daughters married ; its solace was visiting and news .
Chapter 2 Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley .
He had always intended to visit him , though to the last always assuring his wife that he should not go ; and till the evening after the visit was paid she had no knowledge of it .
It was then disclosed in the following manner .
Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat , he suddenly addressed her with : “ I hope Mr. Bingley will like it , Lizzy . ”
“ We are not in a way to know _ what _ Mr. Bingley likes , ” said her mother resentfully , “ since we are not to visit . ”
“ But you forget , mamma , ” said Elizabeth , “ that we shall meet him at the assemblies , and that Mrs. Long promised to introduce him . ”
“ I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing .
She has two nieces of her own .
She is a selfish , hypocritical woman , and I have no opinion of her . ”
“ No more have I , ” said Mr. Bennet ; “ and I am glad to find that you do not depend on her serving you . ”
Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply , but , unable to contain herself , began scolding one of her daughters .
“ Do n't keep coughing so , Kitty , for Heaven 's sake !
Have a little compassion on my nerves .
You tear them to pieces . ”
“ Kitty has no discretion in her coughs , ” said her father ; “ she times them ill . ”
“ I do not cough for my own amusement , ” replied Kitty fretfully .
“ When is your next ball to be , Lizzy ? ”
“ To-morrow fortnight . ”
“ Aye , so it is , ” cried her mother , “ and Mrs. Long does not come back till the day before ; so it will be impossible for her to introduce him , for she will not know him herself . ”
“ Then , my dear , you may have the advantage of your friend , and introduce Mr. Bingley to _ her _ . ”
“ Impossible , Mr. Bennet , impossible , when I am not acquainted with him myself ; how can you be so teasing ? ”
“ I honour your circumspection .
A fortnight 's acquaintance is certainly very little .
One can not know what a man really is by the end of a fortnight .
But if _ we _ do not venture somebody else will ; and after all , Mrs. Long and her neices must stand their chance ; and , therefore , as she will think it an act of kindness , if you decline the office , I will take it on myself . ”
The girls stared at their father .
Mrs. Bennet said only , “ Nonsense , nonsense ! ”
“ What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation ? ”
cried he .
“ Do you consider the forms of introduction , and the stress that is laid on them , as nonsense ?
I can not quite agree with you _ there _ .
What say you , Mary ?
For you are a young lady of deep reflection , I know , and read great books and make extracts . ”
Mary wished to say something sensible , but knew not how .
“ While Mary is adjusting her ideas , ” he continued , “ let us return to Mr. Bingley . ”
“ I am sick of Mr. Bingley , ” cried his wife .
“ I am sorry to hear _ that _ ; but why did not you tell me that before ?
If I had known as much this morning I certainly would not have called on him .
It is very unlucky ; but as I have actually paid the visit , we can not escape the acquaintance now . ”
The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished ; that of Mrs. Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest ; though , when the first tumult of joy was over , she began to declare that it was what she had expected all the while .
“ How good it was in you , my dear Mr. Bennet !
But I knew I should persuade you at last .
I was sure you loved your girls too well to neglect such an acquaintance .
Well , how pleased I am !
and it is such a good joke , too , that you should have gone this morning and never said a word about it till now . ”
“ Now , Kitty , you may cough as much as you choose , ” said Mr. Bennet ; and , as he spoke , he left the room , fatigued with the raptures of his wife .
“ What an excellent father you have , girls ! ”
said she , when the door was shut .
“ I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness ; or me , either , for that matter .
At our time of life it is not so pleasant , I can tell you , to be making new acquaintances every day ; but for your sakes , we would do anything .
Lydia , my love , though you _ are _ the youngest , I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the next ball . ”
Chapter I My father 's family name being Pirrip , and my Christian name Philip , my infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit than Pip .
So , I called myself Pip , and came to be called Pip .
I give Pirrip as my father 's family name , on the authority of his tombstone and my sister , -- Mrs. Joe Gargery , who married the blacksmith .
As I never saw my father or my mother , and never saw any likeness of either of them ( for their days were long before the days of photographs ) , my first fancies regarding what they were like were unreasonably derived from their tombstones .
The shape of the letters on my father 's , gave me an odd idea that he was a square , stout , dark man , with curly black hair .
From the character and turn of the inscription , “ Also Georgiana Wife of the Above , ” I drew a childish conclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly .
To five little stone lozenges , each about a foot and a half long , which were arranged in a neat row beside their grave , and were sacred to the memory of five little brothers of mine , -- who gave up trying to get a living , exceedingly early in that universal struggle , -- I am indebted for a belief I religiously entertained that they had all been born on their backs with their hands in their trousers-pockets , and had never taken them out in this state of existence .
Ours was the marsh country , down by the river , within , as the river wound , twenty miles of the sea .
My first most vivid and broad impression of the identity of things seems to me to have been gained on a memorable raw afternoon towards evening .
At such a time I found out for certain that this bleak place overgrown with nettles was the churchyard ; and that Philip Pirrip , late of this parish , and also Georgiana wife of the above , were dead and buried ; and that Alexander , Bartholomew , Abraham , Tobias , and Roger , infant children of the aforesaid , were also dead and buried ; and that the dark flat wilderness beyond the churchyard , intersected with dikes and mounds and gates , with scattered cattle feeding on it , was the marshes ; and that the low leaden line beyond was the river ; and that the distant savage lair from which the wind was rushing was the sea ; and that the small bundle of shivers growing afraid of it all and beginning to cry , was Pip .
“ Hold your noise ! ”
cried a terrible voice , as a man started up from among the graves at the side of the church porch .
“ Keep still , you little devil , or I 'll cut your throat ! ”
A fearful man , all in coarse gray , with a great iron on his leg .
A man with no hat , and with broken shoes , and with an old rag tied round his head .
A man who had been soaked in water , and smothered in mud , and lamed by stones , and cut by flints , and stung by nettles , and torn by briars ; who limped , and shivered , and glared , and growled ; and whose teeth chattered in his head as he seized me by the chin .
“ Oh !
Do n't cut my throat , sir , ” I pleaded in terror .
“ Pray do n't do it , sir . ”
“ Tell us your name ! ”
said the man .
“ Quick ! ”
“ Pip , sir . ”
“ Once more , ” said the man , staring at me .
“ Give it mouth ! ”
“ Pip .
Pip , sir . ”
“ Show us where you live , ” said the man .
“ Pint out the place ! ”
I pointed to where our village lay , on the flat in-shore among the alder-trees and pollards , a mile or more from the church .
The man , after looking at me for a moment , turned me upside down , and emptied my pockets .
There was nothing in them but a piece of bread .
When the church came to itself , -- for he was so sudden and strong that he made it go head over heels before me , and I saw the steeple under my feet , -- when the church came to itself , I say , I was seated on a high tombstone , trembling while he ate the bread ravenously .
“ You young dog , ” said the man , licking his lips , “ what fat cheeks you ha ' got . ”
I believe they were fat , though I was at that time undersized for my years , and not strong .
“ Darn me if I could n't eat em , ” said the man , with a threatening shake of his head , “ and if I ha n't half a mind to ' t ! ”
I earnestly expressed my hope that he would n't , and held tighter to the tombstone on which he had put me ; partly , to keep myself upon it ; partly , to keep myself from crying .
“ Now lookee here ! ”
said the man .
“ Where 's your mother ? ”
“ There , sir ! ”
said I .
He started , made a short run , and stopped and looked over his shoulder .
“ There , sir ! ”
I timidly explained .
“ Also Georgiana .
That 's my mother . ”
“ Oh ! ”
said he , coming back .
“ And is that your father alonger your mother ? ”
“ Yes , sir , ” said I ; “ him too ; late of this parish . ”
“ Ha ! ”
he muttered then , considering .
“ Who d'ye live with , -- supposin ' you 're kindly let to live , which I ha n't made up my mind about ? ”
“ My sister , sir , -- Mrs. Joe Gargery , -- wife of Joe Gargery , the blacksmith , sir . ”
“ Blacksmith , eh ? ”
said he .
And looked down at his leg .
After darkly looking at his leg and me several times , he came closer to my tombstone , took me by both arms , and tilted me back as far as he could hold me ; so that his eyes looked most powerfully down into mine , and mine looked most helplessly up into his .
“ Now lookee here , ” he said , “ the question being whether you 're to be let to live .
You know what a file is ? ”
“ Yes , sir . ”
“ And you know what wittles is ? ”
“ Yes , sir . ”
After each question he tilted me over a little more , so as to give me a greater sense of helplessness and danger .
“ You get me a file . ”
He tilted me again .
“ And you get me wittles . ”
He tilted me again .
“ You bring 'em both to me . ”
He tilted me again .
“ Or I 'll have your heart and liver out . ”
He tilted me again .
I was dreadfully frightened , and so giddy that I clung to him with both hands , and said , “ If you would kindly please to let me keep upright , sir , perhaps I should n't be sick , and perhaps I could attend more . ”
He gave me a most tremendous dip and roll , so that the church jumped over its own weathercock .
Then , he held me by the arms , in an upright position on the top of the stone , and went on in these fearful terms : -- “ You bring me , to-morrow morning early , that file and them wittles .
You bring the lot to me , at that old Battery over yonder .
You do it , and you never dare to say a word or dare to make a sign concerning your having seen such a person as me , or any person sumever , and you shall be let to live .
You fail , or you go from my words in any partickler , no matter how small it is , and your heart and your liver shall be tore out , roasted , and ate .
Now , I ai n't alone , as you may think I am .
There 's a young man hid with me , in comparison with which young man I am a Angel .
That young man hears the words I speak .
That young man has a secret way pecooliar to himself , of getting at a boy , and at his heart , and at his liver .
It is in wain for a boy to attempt to hide himself from that young man .
A boy may lock his door , may be warm in bed , may tuck himself up , may draw the clothes over his head , may think himself comfortable and safe , but that young man will softly creep and creep his way to him and tear him open .
I am a keeping that young man from harming of you at the present moment , with great difficulty .
I find it wery hard to hold that young man off of your inside .
Now , what do you say ? ”
I said that I would get him the file , and I would get him what broken bits of food I could , and I would come to him at the Battery , early in the morning .
“ Say Lord strike you dead if you do n't ! ”
said the man .
I said so , and he took me down .
“ Now , ” he pursued , “ you remember what you 've undertook , and you remember that young man , and you get home ! ”
“ Goo-good night , sir , ” I faltered .
“ Much of that ! ”
said he , glancing about him over the cold wet flat .
“ I wish I was a frog .
Or a eel ! ”
At the same time , he hugged his shuddering body in both his arms , -- clasping himself , as if to hold himself together , -- and limped towards the low church wall .
As I saw him go , picking his way among the nettles , and among the brambles that bound the green mounds , he looked in my young eyes as if he were eluding the hands of the dead people , stretching up cautiously out of their graves , to get a twist upon his ankle and pull him in .
When he came to the low church wall , he got over it , like a man whose legs were numbed and stiff , and then turned round to look for me .
When I saw him turning , I set my face towards home , and made the best use of my legs .
But presently I looked over my shoulder , and saw him going on again towards the river , still hugging himself in both arms , and picking his way with his sore feet among the great stones dropped into the marshes here and there , for stepping-places when the rains were heavy or the tide was in .
BOOK I. MISS BROOKE .
CHAPTER I. " Since I can do no good because a woman , Reach constantly at something that is near it .
-- The Maid 's Tragedy : BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER .
Miss Brooke had that kind of beauty which seems to be thrown into relief by poor dress .
Her hand and wrist were so finely formed that she could wear sleeves not less bare of style than those in which the Blessed Virgin appeared to Italian painters ; and her profile as well as her stature and bearing seemed to gain the more dignity from her plain garments , which by the side of provincial fashion gave her the impressiveness of a fine quotation from the Bible , -- or from one of our elder poets , -- in a paragraph of to-day 's newspaper .
She was usually spoken of as being remarkably clever , but with the addition that her sister Celia had more common-sense .
Nevertheless , Celia wore scarcely more trimmings ; and it was only to close observers that her dress differed from her sister 's , and had a shade of coquetry in its arrangements ; for Miss Brooke 's plain dressing was due to mixed conditions , in most of which her sister shared .
The pride of being ladies had something to do with it : the Brooke connections , though not exactly aristocratic , were unquestionably " good : " if you inquired backward for a generation or two , you would not find any yard-measuring or parcel-tying forefathers -- anything lower than an admiral or a clergyman ; and there was even an ancestor discernible as a Puritan gentleman who served under Cromwell , but afterwards conformed , and managed to come out of all political troubles as the proprietor of a respectable family estate .
Young women of such birth , living in a quiet country-house , and attending a village church hardly larger than a parlor , naturally regarded frippery as the ambition of a huckster 's daughter .
Then there was well-bred economy , which in those days made show in dress the first item to be deducted from , when any margin was required for expenses more distinctive of rank .
Such reasons would have been enough to account for plain dress , quite apart from religious feeling ; but in Miss Brooke 's case , religion alone would have determined it ; and Celia mildly acquiesced in all her sister 's sentiments , only infusing them with that common-sense which is able to accept momentous doctrines without any eccentric agitation .
Dorothea knew many passages of Pascal 's Pensees and of Jeremy Taylor by heart ; and to her the destinies of mankind , seen by the light of Christianity , made the solicitudes of feminine fashion appear an occupation for Bedlam .
She could not reconcile the anxieties of a spiritual life involving eternal consequences , with a keen interest in gimp and artificial protrusions of drapery .
Her mind was theoretic , and yearned by its nature after some lofty conception of the world which might frankly include the parish of Tipton and her own rule of conduct there ; she was enamoured of intensity and greatness , and rash in embracing whatever seemed to her to have those aspects ; likely to seek martyrdom , to make retractations , and then to incur martyrdom after all in a quarter where she had not sought it .
Certainly such elements in the character of a marriageable girl tended to interfere with her lot , and hinder it from being decided according to custom , by good looks , vanity , and merely canine affection .
With all this , she , the elder of the sisters , was not yet twenty , and they had both been educated , since they were about twelve years old and had lost their parents , on plans at once narrow and promiscuous , first in an English family and afterwards in a Swiss family at Lausanne , their bachelor uncle and guardian trying in this way to remedy the disadvantages of their orphaned condition .
It was hardly a year since they had come to live at Tipton Grange with their uncle , a man nearly sixty , of acquiescent temper , miscellaneous opinions , and uncertain vote .
He had travelled in his younger years , and was held in this part of the county to have contracted a too rambling habit of mind .
Mr. Brooke 's conclusions were as difficult to predict as the weather : it was only safe to say that he would act with benevolent intentions , and that he would spend as little money as possible in carrying them out .
For the most glutinously indefinite minds enclose some hard grains of habit ; and a man has been seen lax about all his own interests except the retention of his snuff-box , concerning which he was watchful , suspicious , and greedy of clutch .
In Mr. Brooke the hereditary strain of Puritan energy was clearly in abeyance ; but in his niece Dorothea it glowed alike through faults and virtues , turning sometimes into impatience of her uncle 's talk or his way of " letting things be " on his estate , and making her long all the more for the time when she would be of age and have some command of money for generous schemes .
She was regarded as an heiress ; for not only had the sisters seven hundred a-year each from their parents , but if Dorothea married and had a son , that son would inherit Mr. Brooke 's estate , presumably worth about three thousand a-year -- a rental which seemed wealth to provincial families , still discussing Mr. Peel 's late conduct on the Catholic question , innocent of future gold-fields , and of that gorgeous plutocracy which has so nobly exalted the necessities of genteel life .
And how should Dorothea not marry ?
-- a girl so handsome and with such prospects ?
Nothing could hinder it but her love of extremes , and her insistence on regulating life according to notions which might cause a wary man to hesitate before he made her an offer , or even might lead her at last to refuse all offers .
A young lady of some birth and fortune , who knelt suddenly down on a brick floor by the side of a sick laborer and prayed fervidly as if she thought herself living in the time of the Apostles -- who had strange whims of fasting like a Papist , and of sitting up at night to read old theological books !
Such a wife might awaken you some fine morning with a new scheme for the application of her income which would interfere with political economy and the keeping of saddle-horses : a man would naturally think twice before he risked himself in such fellowship .
Women were expected to have weak opinions ; but the great safeguard of society and of domestic life was , that opinions were not acted on .
Sane people did what their neighbors did , so that if any lunatics were at large , one might know and avoid them .
The rural opinion about the new young ladies , even among the cottagers , was generally in favor of Celia , as being so amiable and innocent-looking , while Miss Brooke 's large eyes seemed , like her religion , too unusual and striking .
Poor Dorothea !
compared with her , the innocent-looking Celia was knowing and worldly-wise ; so much subtler is a human mind than the outside tissues which make a sort of blazonry or clock-face for it .
Yet those who approached Dorothea , though prejudiced against her by this alarming hearsay , found that she had a charm unaccountably reconcilable with it .
Most men thought her bewitching when she was on horseback .
She loved the fresh air and the various aspects of the country , and when her eyes and cheeks glowed with mingled pleasure she looked very little like a devotee .
Riding was an indulgence which she allowed herself in spite of conscientious qualms ; she felt that she enjoyed it in a pagan sensuous way , and always looked forward to renouncing it .
She was open , ardent , and not in the least self-admiring ; indeed , it was pretty to see how her imagination adorned her sister Celia with attractions altogether superior to her own , and if any gentleman appeared to come to the Grange from some other motive than that of seeing Mr. Brooke , she concluded that he must be in love with Celia : Sir James Chettam , for example , whom she constantly considered from Celia 's point of view , inwardly debating whether it would be good for Celia to accept him .
That he should be regarded as a suitor to herself would have seemed to her a ridiculous irrelevance .
Dorothea , with all her eagerness to know the truths of life , retained very childlike ideas about marriage .
She felt sure that she would have accepted the judicious Hooker , if she had been born in time to save him from that wretched mistake he made in matrimony ; or John Milton when his blindness had come on ; or any of the other great men whose odd habits it would have been glorious piety to endure ; but an amiable handsome baronet , who said " Exactly " to her remarks even when she expressed uncertainty , -- how could he affect her as a lover ?
The really delightful marriage must be that where your husband was a sort of father , and could teach you even Hebrew , if you wished it .
These peculiarities of Dorothea 's character caused Mr. Brooke to be all the more blamed in neighboring families for not securing some middle-aged lady as guide and companion to his nieces .
But he himself dreaded so much the sort of superior woman likely to be available for such a position , that he allowed himself to be dissuaded by Dorothea 's objections , and was in this case brave enough to defy the world -- that is to say , Mrs. Cadwallader the Rector 's wife , and the small group of gentry with whom he visited in the northeast corner of Loamshire .
So Miss Brooke presided in her uncle 's household , and did not at all dislike her new authority , with the homage that belonged to it .
Sir James Chettam was going to dine at the Grange to-day with another gentleman whom the girls had never seen , and about whom Dorothea felt some venerating expectation .
This was the Reverend Edward Casaubon , noted in the county as a man of profound learning , understood for many years to be engaged on a great work concerning religious history ; also as a man of wealth enough to give lustre to his piety , and having views of his own which were to be more clearly ascertained on the publication of his book .
His very name carried an impressiveness hardly to be measured without a precise chronology of scholarship .
Early in the day Dorothea had returned from the infant school which she had set going in the village , and was taking her usual place in the pretty sitting-room which divided the bedrooms of the sisters , bent on finishing a plan for some buildings ( a kind of work which she delighted in ) , when Celia , who had been watching her with a hesitating desire to propose something , said --
_ One _ DREAMS Night fell .
The red waters of the swamp grew sinister and sullen .
The tall pines lost their slimness and stood in wide blurred blotches all across the way , and a great shadowy bird arose , wheeled and melted , murmuring , into the black-green sky .
The boy wearily dropped his heavy bundle and stood still , listening as the voice of crickets split the shadows and made the silence audible .
A tear wandered down his brown cheek .
They were at supper now , he whispered -- the father and old mother , away back yonder beyond the night .
They were far away ; they would never be as near as once they had been , for he had stepped into the world .
And the cat and Old Billy -- ah , but the world was a lonely thing , so wide and tall and empty !
And so bare , so bitter bare !
Somehow he had never dreamed of the world as lonely before ; he had fared forth to beckoning hands and luring , and to the eager hum of human voices , as of some great , swelling music .
Yet now he was alone ; the empty night was closing all about him here in a strange land , and he was afraid .
The bundle with his earthly treasure had hung heavy and heavier on his shoulder ; his little horde of money was tightly wadded in his sock , and the school lay hidden somewhere far away in the shadows .
He wondered how far it was ; he looked and harkened , starting at his own heartbeats , and fearing more and more the long dark fingers of the night .
Then of a sudden up from the darkness came music .
It was human music , but of a wildness and a weirdness that startled the boy as it fluttered and danced across the dull red waters of the swamp .
He hesitated , then impelled by some strange power , left the highway and slipped into the forest of the swamp , shrinking , yet following the song hungrily and half forgetting his fear .
A harsher , shriller note struck in as of many and ruder voices ; but above it flew the first sweet music , birdlike , abandoned , and the boy crept closer .
The cabin crouched ragged and black at the edge of black waters .
An old chimney leaned drunkenly against it , raging with fire and smoke , while through the chinks winked red gleams of warmth and wild cheer .
With a revel of shouting and noise , the music suddenly ceased .
Hoarse staccato cries and peals of laughter shook the old hut , and as the boy stood there peering through the black trees , abruptly the door flew open and a flood of light illumined the wood .
Amid this mighty halo , as on clouds of flame , a girl was dancing .
She was black , and lithe , and tall , and willowy .
Her garments twined and flew around the delicate moulding of her dark , young , half-naked limbs .
A heavy mass of hair clung motionless to her wide forehead .
Her arms twirled and flickered , and body and soul seemed quivering and whirring in the poetry of her motion .
As she danced she sang .
He heard her voice as before , fluttering like a bird 's in the full sweetness of her utter music .
It was no tune nor melody , it was just formless , boundless music .
The boy forgot himself and all the world besides .
All his darkness was sudden light ; dazzled he crept forward , bewildered , fascinated , until with one last wild whirl the elf-girl paused .
The crimson light fell full upon the warm and velvet bronze of her face -- her midnight eyes were aglow , her full purple lips apart , her half hid bosom panting , and all the music dead .
Involuntarily the boy gave a gasping cry and awoke to swamp and night and fire , while a white face , drawn , red-eyed , peered outward from some hidden throng within the cabin .
" Who 's that ? " a harsh voice cried .
" Where ? "
" Who is it ? " and pale crowding faces blurred the light .
The boy wheeled blindly and fled in terror stumbling through the swamp , hearing strange sounds and feeling stealthy creeping hands and arms and whispering voices .
On he toiled in mad haste , struggling toward the road and losing it until finally beneath the shadows of a mighty oak he sank exhausted .
There he lay a while trembling and at last drifted into dreamless sleep .
It was morning when he awoke and threw a startled glance upward to the twisted branches of the oak that bent above , sifting down sunshine on his brown face and close curled hair .
Slowly he remembered the loneliness , the fear and wild running through the dark .
He laughed in the bold courage of day and stretched himself .
Then suddenly he bethought him again of that vision of the night -- the waving arms and flying limbs of the girl , and her great black eyes looking into the night and calling him .
He could hear her now , and hear that wondrous savage music .
Had it been real ?
Had he dreamed ?
Or had it been some witch-vision of the night , come to tempt and lure him to his undoing ?
Where was that black and flaming cabin ?
Where was the girl -- the soul that had called him ?
_ She _ must have been real ; she had to live and dance and sing ; he must again look into the mystery of her great eyes .
And he sat up in sudden determination , and , lo !
gazed straight into the very eyes of his dreaming .
She sat not four feet from him , leaning against the great tree , her eyes now languorously abstracted , now alert and quizzical with mischief .
She seemed but half-clothed , and her warm , dark flesh peeped furtively through the rent gown ; her thick , crisp hair was frowsy and rumpled , and the long curves of her bare young arms gleamed in the morning sunshine , glowing with vigor and life .
A little mocking smile came and sat upon her lips .
" What you run for ? " she asked , with dancing mischief in her eyes .
" Because -- " he hesitated , and his cheeks grew hot .
" I knows , " she said , with impish glee , laughing low music .
" Why ? " he challenged , sturdily .
" You was a-feared . "
He bridled .
" Well , I reckon you 'd be a-feared if you was caught out in the black dark all alone . "
" Pooh ! " she scoffed and hugged her knees .
" Pooh !
I 've stayed out all alone heaps o ' nights . "
He looked at her with a curious awe .
" I do n't believe you , " he asserted ; but she tossed her head and her eyes grew scornful .
" Who 's a-feared of the dark ?
I love night . "
Her eyes grew soft .
He watched her silently , till , waking from her daydream , she abruptly asked : " Where you from ? "
" Georgia . "
" Where 's that ? "
He looked at her in surprise , but she seemed matter-of-fact .
" It 's away over yonder , " he answered .
" Behind where the sun comes up ? "
" Oh , no ! "
" Then it ai n't so far , " she declared .
" I knows where the sun rises , and I knows where it sets . "
She looked up at its gleaming splendor glinting through the leaves , and , noting its height , announced abruptly : " I ' se hungry . "
" So 'm I , " answered the boy , fumbling at his bundle ; and then , timidly : " Will you eat with me ? "
" Yes , " she said , and watched him with eager eyes .
Untying the strips of cloth , he opened his box , and disclosed chicken and biscuits , ham and corn-bread .
She clapped her hands in glee .
" Is there any water near ? " he asked .
Without a word , she bounded up and flitted off like a brown bird , gleaming dull-golden in the sun , glancing in and out among the trees , till she paused above a tiny black pool , and then came tripping and swaying back with hands held cupwise and dripping with cool water .
" Drink , " she cried .
Obediently he bent over the little hands that seemed so soft and thin .
He took a deep draught ; and then to drain the last drop , his hands touched hers and the shock of flesh first meeting flesh startled them both , while the water rained through .
A moment their eyes looked deep into each other 's -- a timid , startled gleam in hers ; a wonder in his .
Then she said dreamily : " We ' se known us all our lives , and -- before , ai n't we ? "
He hesitated .
" Ye -- es -- I reckon , " he slowly returned .
And then , brightening , he asked gayly : " And we 'll be friends always , wo n't we ? "
" Yes , " she said at last , slowly and solemnly , and another brief moment they stood still .
Then the mischief danced in her eyes , and a song bubbled on her lips .
She hopped to the tree .
" Come -- eat ! " she cried .
And they nestled together amid the big black roots of the oak , laughing and talking while they ate .
" What 's over there ? " he asked pointing northward .
" Cresswell 's big house . "
" And yonder to the west ? "
" The school . "
He started joyfully .
" The school !
What school ? "
" Old Miss ' School . "
" Miss Smith 's school ? "
" Yes . "
The tone was disdainful .
" Why , that 's where I 'm going .
I was a-feared it was a long way off ; I must have passed it in the night . "
" I hate it ! " cried the girl , her lips tense .
" But I 'll be so near , " he explained .
" And why do you hate it ? "
" Yes -- you 'll be near , " she admitted ; " that 'll be nice ; but -- " she glanced westward , and the fierce look faded .
Soft joy crept to her face again , and she sat once more dreaming .
" Yon way 's nicest , " she said .
" Why , what 's there ? "
" The swamp , " she said mysteriously .
" And what 's beyond the swamp ? "
She crouched beside him and whispered in eager , tense tones : " Dreams ! "
He looked at her , puzzled .
PROLOGUE THE STORMING OF SERINGAPATAM ( 1799 ) Extracted from a Family Paper I address these lines -- written in India -- to my relatives in England .
My object is to explain the motive which has induced me to refuse the right hand of friendship to my cousin , John Herncastle .
The reserve which I have hitherto maintained in this matter has been misinterpreted by members of my family whose good opinion I can not consent to forfeit .
I request them to suspend their decision until they have read my narrative .
And I declare , on my word of honour , that what I am now about to write is , strictly and literally , the truth .
The private difference between my cousin and me took its rise in a great public event in which we were both concerned -- the storming of Seringapatam , under General Baird , on the 4th of May , 1799 .
In order that the circumstances may be clearly understood , I must revert for a moment to the period before the assault , and to the stories current in our camp of the treasure in jewels and gold stored up in the Palace of Seringapatam .
II One of the wildest of these stories related to a Yellow Diamond -- a famous gem in the native annals of India .
The earliest known traditions describe the stone as having been set in the forehead of the four-handed Indian god who typifies the Moon .
Partly from its peculiar colour , partly from a superstition which represented it as feeling the influence of the deity whom it adorned , and growing and lessening in lustre with the waxing and waning of the moon , it first gained the name by which it continues to be known in India to this day -- the name of THE MOONSTONE .
A similar superstition was once prevalent , as I have heard , in ancient Greece and Rome ; not applying , however ( as in India ) , to a diamond devoted to the service of a god , but to a semi-transparent stone of the inferior order of gems , supposed to be affected by the lunar influences -- the moon , in this latter case also , giving the name by which the stone is still known to collectors in our own time .
The adventures of the Yellow Diamond begin with the eleventh century of the Christian era .
At that date , the Mohammedan conqueror , Mahmoud of Ghizni , crossed India ; seized on the holy city of Somnauth ; and stripped of its treasures the famous temple , which had stood for centuries -- the shrine of Hindoo pilgrimage , and the wonder of the Eastern world .
Of all the deities worshipped in the temple , the moon-god alone escaped the rapacity of the conquering Mohammedans .
Preserved by three Brahmins , the inviolate deity , bearing the Yellow Diamond in its forehead , was removed by night , and was transported to the second of the sacred cities of India -- the city of Benares .
Here , in a new shrine -- in a hall inlaid with precious stones , under a roof supported by pillars of gold -- the moon-god was set up and worshipped .
Here , on the night when the shrine was completed , Vishnu the Preserver appeared to the three Brahmins in a dream .
The deity breathed the breath of his divinity on the Diamond in the forehead of the god .
And the Brahmins knelt and hid their faces in their robes .
The deity commanded that the Moonstone should be watched , from that time forth , by three priests in turn , night and day , to the end of the generations of men .
And the Brahmins heard , and bowed before his will .
The deity predicted certain disaster to the presumptuous mortal who laid hands on the sacred gem , and to all of his house and name who received it after him .
And the Brahmins caused the prophecy to be written over the gates of the shrine in letters of gold .
One age followed another -- and still , generation after generation , the successors of the three Brahmins watched their priceless Moonstone , night and day .
One age followed another until the first years of the eighteenth Christian century saw the reign of Aurungzebe , Emperor of the Moguls .
At his command havoc and rapine were let loose once more among the temples of the worship of Brahmah .
The shrine of the four-handed god was polluted by the slaughter of sacred animals ; the images of the deities were broken in pieces ; and the Moonstone was seized by an officer of rank in the army of Aurungzebe .
Powerless to recover their lost treasure by open force , the three guardian priests followed and watched it in disguise .
The generations succeeded each other ; the warrior who had committed the sacrilege perished miserably ; the Moonstone passed ( carrying its curse with it ) from one lawless Mohammedan hand to another ; and still , through all chances and changes , the successors of the three guardian priests kept their watch , waiting the day when the will of Vishnu the Preserver should restore to them their sacred gem .
Time rolled on from the first to the last years of the eighteenth Christian century .
The Diamond fell into the possession of Tippoo , Sultan of Seringapatam , who caused it to be placed as an ornament in the handle of a dagger , and who commanded it to be kept among the choicest treasures of his armoury .
Even then -- in the palace of the Sultan himself -- the three guardian priests still kept their watch in secret .
There were three officers of Tippoo ’s household , strangers to the rest , who had won their master ’s confidence by conforming , or appearing to conform , to the Mussulman faith ; and to those three men report pointed as the three priests in disguise .
III So , as told in our camp , ran the fanciful story of the Moonstone .
It made no serious impression on any of us except my cousin -- whose love of the marvellous induced him to believe it .
On the night before the assault on Seringapatam , he was absurdly angry with me , and with others , for treating the whole thing as a fable .
A foolish wrangle followed ; and Herncastle ’s unlucky temper got the better of him .
He declared , in his boastful way , that we should see the Diamond on his finger , if the English army took Seringapatam .
The sally was saluted by a roar of laughter , and there , as we all thought that night , the thing ended .
Let me now take you on to the day of the assault .
My cousin and I were separated at the outset .
I never saw him when we forded the river ; when we planted the English flag in the first breach ; when we crossed the ditch beyond ; and , fighting every inch of our way , entered the town .
It was only at dusk , when the place was ours , and after General Baird himself had found the dead body of Tippoo under a heap of the slain , that Herncastle and I met .
We were each attached to a party sent out by the general ’s orders to prevent the plunder and confusion which followed our conquest .
The camp-followers committed deplorable excesses ; and , worse still , the soldiers found their way , by a guarded door , into the treasury of the Palace , and loaded themselves with gold and jewels .
It was in the court outside the treasury that my cousin and I met , to enforce the laws of discipline on our own soldiers .
Herncastle ’s fiery temper had been , as I could plainly see , exasperated to a kind of frenzy by the terrible slaughter through which we had passed .
He was very unfit , in my opinion , to perform the duty that had been entrusted to him .
There was riot and confusion enough in the treasury , but no violence that I saw .
The men ( if I may use such an expression ) disgraced themselves good-humouredly .
All sorts of rough jests and catchwords were bandied about among them ; and the story of the Diamond turned up again unexpectedly , in the form of a mischievous joke .
“ Who ’s got the Moonstone ? ” was the rallying cry which perpetually caused the plundering , as soon as it was stopped in one place , to break out in another .
While I was still vainly trying to establish order , I heard a frightful yelling on the other side of the courtyard , and at once ran towards the cries , in dread of finding some new outbreak of the pillage in that direction .
I got to an open door , and saw the bodies of two Indians ( by their dress , as I guessed , officers of the palace ) lying across the entrance , dead .
A cry inside hurried me into a room , which appeared to serve as an armoury .
A third Indian , mortally wounded , was sinking at the feet of a man whose back was towards me .
The man turned at the instant when I came in , and I saw John Herncastle , with a torch in one hand , and a dagger dripping with blood in the other .
A stone , set like a pommel , in the end of the dagger ’s handle , flashed in the torchlight , as he turned on me , like a gleam of fire .
The dying Indian sank to his knees , pointed to the dagger in Herncastle ’s hand , and said , in his native language -- “ The Moonstone will have its vengeance yet on you and yours ! ”
He spoke those words , and fell dead on the floor .
Before I could stir in the matter , the men who had followed me across the courtyard crowded in .
My cousin rushed to meet them , like a madman .
“ Clear the room ! ” he shouted to me , “ and set a guard on the door ! ”
The men fell back as he threw himself on them with his torch and his dagger .
I put two sentinels of my own company , on whom I could rely , to keep the door .
Through the remainder of the night , I saw no more of my cousin .
Early in the morning , the plunder still going on , General Baird announced publicly by beat of drum , that any thief detected in the fact , be he whom he might , should be hung .
The provost-marshal was in attendance , to prove that the General was in earnest ; and in the throng that followed the proclamation , Herncastle and I met again .
He held out his hand , as usual , and said , “ Good morning . ”
I waited before I gave him my hand in return .
“ Tell me first , ” I said , “ how the Indian in the armoury met his death , and what those last words meant , when he pointed to the dagger in your hand . ”
“ The Indian met his death , as I suppose , by a mortal wound , ” said Herncastle .
“ What his last words meant I know no more than you do . ”
VOLUME I CHAPTER I Emma Woodhouse , handsome , clever , and rich , with a comfortable home and happy disposition , seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence ; and had lived nearly twenty-one years in the world with very little to distress or vex her .
She was the youngest of the two daughters of a most affectionate , indulgent father ; and had , in consequence of her sister 's marriage , been mistress of his house from a very early period .
Her mother had died too long ago for her to have more than an indistinct remembrance of her caresses ; and her place had been supplied by an excellent woman as governess , who had fallen little short of a mother in affection .
Sixteen years had Miss Taylor been in Mr. Woodhouse 's family , less as a governess than a friend , very fond of both daughters , but particularly of Emma .
Between _ them _ it was more the intimacy of sisters .
Even before Miss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess , the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed her to impose any restraint ; and the shadow of authority being now long passed away , they had been living together as friend and friend very mutually attached , and Emma doing just what she liked ; highly esteeming Miss Taylor 's judgment , but directed chiefly by her own .
The real evils , indeed , of Emma 's situation were the power of having rather too much her own way , and a disposition to think a little too well of herself ; these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy to her many enjoyments .
The danger , however , was at present so unperceived , that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes with her .
Sorrow came -- a gentle sorrow -- but not at all in the shape of any disagreeable consciousness .
-- Miss Taylor married .
It was Miss Taylor 's loss which first brought grief .
It was on the wedding-day of this beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any continuance .
The wedding over , and the bride-people gone , her father and herself were left to dine together , with no prospect of a third to cheer a long evening .
Her father composed himself to sleep after dinner , as usual , and she had then only to sit and think of what she had lost .
The event had every promise of happiness for her friend .
Mr. Weston was a man of unexceptionable character , easy fortune , suitable age , and pleasant manners ; and there was some satisfaction in considering with what self-denying , generous friendship she had always wished and promoted the match ; but it was a black morning 's work for her .
The want of Miss Taylor would be felt every hour of every day .
She recalled her past kindness -- the kindness , the affection of sixteen years -- how she had taught and how she had played with her from five years old -- how she had devoted all her powers to attach and amuse her in health -- and how nursed her through the various illnesses of childhood .
A large debt of gratitude was owing here ; but the intercourse of the last seven years , the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followed Isabella 's marriage , on their being left to each other , was yet a dearer , tenderer recollection .
She had been a friend and companion such as few possessed : intelligent , well-informed , useful , gentle , knowing all the ways of the family , interested in all its concerns , and peculiarly interested in herself , in every pleasure , every scheme of hers -- one to whom she could speak every thought as it arose , and who had such an affection for her as could never find fault .
How was she to bear the change ?
-- It was true that her friend was going only half a mile from them ; but Emma was aware that great must be the difference between a Mrs. Weston , only half a mile from them , and a Miss Taylor in the house ; and with all her advantages , natural and domestic , she was now in great danger of suffering from intellectual solitude .
She dearly loved her father , but he was no companion for her .
He could not meet her in conversation , rational or playful .
The evil of the actual disparity in their ages ( and Mr. Woodhouse had not married early ) was much increased by his constitution and habits ; for having been a valetudinarian all his life , without activity of mind or body , he was a much older man in ways than in years ; and though everywhere beloved for the friendliness of his heart and his amiable temper , his talents could not have recommended him at any time .
Her sister , though comparatively but little removed by matrimony , being settled in London , only sixteen miles off , was much beyond her daily reach ; and many a long October and November evening must be struggled through at Hartfield , before Christmas brought the next visit from Isabella and her husband , and their little children , to fill the house , and give her pleasant society again .
Highbury , the large and populous village , almost amounting to a town , to which Hartfield , in spite of its separate lawn , and shrubberies , and name , did really belong , afforded her no equals .
The Woodhouses were first in consequence there .
All looked up to them .
She had many acquaintance in the place , for her father was universally civil , but not one among them who could be accepted in lieu of Miss Taylor for even half a day .
It was a melancholy change ; and Emma could not but sigh over it , and wish for impossible things , till her father awoke , and made it necessary to be cheerful .
His spirits required support .
He was a nervous man , easily depressed ; fond of every body that he was used to , and hating to part with them ; hating change of every kind .
Matrimony , as the origin of change , was always disagreeable ; and he was by no means yet reconciled to his own daughter 's marrying , nor could ever speak of her but with compassion , though it had been entirely a match of affection , when he was now obliged to part with Miss Taylor too ; and from his habits of gentle selfishness , and of being never able to suppose that other people could feel differently from himself , he was very much disposed to think Miss Taylor had done as sad a thing for herself as for them , and would have been a great deal happier if she had spent all the rest of her life at Hartfield .
Emma smiled and chatted as cheerfully as she could , to keep him from such thoughts ; but when tea came , it was impossible for him not to say exactly as he had said at dinner , “ Poor Miss Taylor !
-- I wish she were here again .
What a pity it is that Mr. Weston ever thought of her ! ”
“ I can not agree with you , papa ; you know I can not .
Mr. Weston is such a good-humoured , pleasant , excellent man , that he thoroughly deserves a good wife ; -- and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us for ever , and bear all my odd humours , when she might have a house of her own ? ”
“ A house of her own !
-- But where is the advantage of a house of her own ?
This is three times as large .
-- And you have never any odd humours , my dear . ”
“ How often we shall be going to see them , and they coming to see us !
-- We shall be always meeting !
_ We _ must begin ; we must go and pay wedding visit very soon . ”
“ My dear , how am I to get so far ?
Randalls is such a distance .
I could not walk half so far . ”
“ No , papa , nobody thought of your walking .
We must go in the carriage , to be sure . ”
“ The carriage !
But James will not like to put the horses to for such a little way ; -- and where are the poor horses to be while we are paying our visit ? ”
“ They are to be put into Mr. Weston 's stable , papa .
You know we have settled all that already .
We talked it all over with Mr. Weston last night .
And as for James , you may be very sure he will always like going to Randalls , because of his daughter 's being housemaid there .
I only doubt whether he will ever take us anywhere else .
That was your doing , papa .
You got Hannah that good place .
Nobody thought of Hannah till you mentioned her -- James is so obliged to you ! ”
“ I am very glad I did think of her .
It was very lucky , for I would not have had poor James think himself slighted upon any account ; and I am sure she will make a very good servant : she is a civil , pretty-spoken girl ; I have a great opinion of her .
Whenever I see her , she always curtseys and asks me how I do , in a very pretty manner ; and when you have had her here to do needlework , I observe she always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it .
I am sure she will be an excellent servant ; and it will be a great comfort to poor Miss Taylor to have somebody about her that she is used to see .
Whenever James goes over to see his daughter , you know , she will be hearing of us .
He will be able to tell her how we all are . ”
Emma spared no exertions to maintain this happier flow of ideas , and hoped , by the help of backgammon , to get her father tolerably through the evening , and be attacked by no regrets but her own .
The backgammon-table was placed ; but a visitor immediately afterwards walked in and made it unnecessary .
Mr. Knightley , a sensible man about seven or eight-and-thirty , was not only a very old and intimate friend of the family , but particularly connected with it , as the elder brother of Isabella 's husband .
He lived about a mile from Highbury , was a frequent visitor , and always welcome , and at this time more welcome than usual , as coming directly from their mutual connexions in London .
He had returned to a late dinner , after some days ' absence , and now walked up to Hartfield to say that all were well in Brunswick Square .
It was a happy circumstance , and animated Mr. Woodhouse for some time .
Mr. Knightley had a cheerful manner , which always did him good ; and his many inquiries after “ poor Isabella ” and her children were answered most satisfactorily .
When this was over , Mr. Woodhouse gratefully observed , “ It is very kind of you , Mr. Knightley , to come out at this late hour to call upon us .
I am afraid you must have had a shocking walk . ”
“I A green and yellow parrot , which hung in a cage outside the door , kept repeating over and over : “ Allez vous-en !
Allez vous-en !
Sapristi !
That 's all right ! ”
He could speak a little Spanish , and also a language which nobody understood , unless it was the mocking-bird that hung on the other side of the door , whistling his fluty notes out upon the breeze with maddening persistence .
Mr. Pontellier , unable to read his newspaper with any degree of comfort , arose with an expression and an exclamation of disgust .
He walked down the gallery and across the narrow “ bridges ” which connected the Lebrun cottages one with the other .
He had been seated before the door of the main house .
The parrot and the mockingbird were the property of Madame Lebrun , and they had the right to make all the noise they wished .
Mr. Pontellier had the privilege of quitting their society when they ceased to be entertaining .
He stopped before the door of his own cottage , which was the fourth one from the main building and next to the last .
Seating himself in a wicker rocker which was there , he once more applied himself to the task of reading the newspaper .
The day was Sunday ; the paper was a day old .
The Sunday papers had not yet reached Grand Isle .
He was already acquainted with the market reports , and he glanced restlessly over the editorials and bits of news which he had not had time to read before quitting New Orleans the day before .
Mr. Pontellier wore eye-glasses .
He was a man of forty , of medium height and rather slender build ; he stooped a little .
His hair was brown and straight , parted on one side .
His beard was neatly and closely trimmed .
Once in a while he withdrew his glance from the newspaper and looked about him .
There was more noise than ever over at the house .
The main building was called “ the house , ” to distinguish it from the cottages .
The chattering and whistling birds were still at it .
Two young girls , the Farival twins , were playing a duet from “ Zampa ” upon the piano .
Madame Lebrun was bustling in and out , giving orders in a high key to a yard-boy whenever she got inside the house , and directions in an equally high voice to a dining-room servant whenever she got outside .
She was a fresh , pretty woman , clad always in white with elbow sleeves .
Her starched skirts crinkled as she came and went .
Farther down , before one of the cottages , a lady in black was walking demurely up and down , telling her beads .
A good many persons of the pension had gone over to the Cheniere Caminada in Beaudelet 's lugger to hear mass .
Some young people were out under the wateroaks playing croquet .
Mr. Pontellier 's two children were there -- sturdy little fellows of four and five .
A quadroon nurse followed them about with a faraway , meditative air .
Mr. Pontellier finally lit a cigar and began to smoke , letting the paper drag idly from his hand .
He fixed his gaze upon a white sunshade that was advancing at snail 's pace from the beach .
He could see it plainly between the gaunt trunks of the water-oaks and across the stretch of yellow camomile .
The gulf looked far away , melting hazily into the blue of the horizon .
The sunshade continued to approach slowly .
Beneath its pink-lined shelter were his wife , Mrs. Pontellier , and young Robert Lebrun .
When they reached the cottage , the two seated themselves with some appearance of fatigue upon the upper step of the porch , facing each other , each leaning against a supporting post .
“ What folly !
to bathe at such an hour in such heat ! ”
exclaimed Mr. Pontellier .
He himself had taken a plunge at daylight .
That was why the morning seemed long to him .
“ You are burnt beyond recognition , ” he added , looking at his wife as one looks at a valuable piece of personal property which has suffered some damage .
She held up her hands , strong , shapely hands , and surveyed them critically , drawing up her fawn sleeves above the wrists .
Looking at them reminded her of her rings , which she had given to her husband before leaving for the beach .
She silently reached out to him , and he , understanding , took the rings from his vest pocket and dropped them into her open palm .
She slipped them upon her fingers ; then clasping her knees , she looked across at Robert and began to laugh .
The rings sparkled upon her fingers .
He sent back an answering smile .
“ What is it ? ”
asked Pontellier , looking lazily and amused from one to the other .
It was some utter nonsense ; some adventure out there in the water , and they both tried to relate it at once .
It did not seem half so amusing when told .
They realized this , and so did Mr. Pontellier .
He yawned and stretched himself .
Then he got up , saying he had half a mind to go over to Klein 's hotel and play a game of billiards .
“ Come go along , Lebrun , ” he proposed to Robert .
But Robert admitted quite frankly that he preferred to stay where he was and talk to Mrs. Pontellier .
“ Well , send him about his business when he bores you , Edna , ” instructed her husband as he prepared to leave .
“ Here , take the umbrella , ” she exclaimed , holding it out to him .
He accepted the sunshade , and lifting it over his head descended the steps and walked away .
“ Coming back to dinner ? ”
his wife called after him .
He halted a moment and shrugged his shoulders .
He felt in his vest pocket ; there was a ten-dollar bill there .
He did not know ; perhaps he would return for the early dinner and perhaps he would not .
It all depended upon the company which he found over at Klein 's and the size of “ the game . ”
He did not say this , but she understood it , and laughed , nodding good-by to him .
Both children wanted to follow their father when they saw him starting out .
He kissed them and promised to bring them back bonbons and peanuts .
II Mrs. Pontellier 's eyes were quick and bright ; they were a yellowish brown , about the color of her hair .
She had a way of turning them swiftly upon an object and holding them there as if lost in some inward maze of contemplation or thought .
Her eyebrows were a shade darker than her hair .
They were thick and almost horizontal , emphasizing the depth of her eyes .
She was rather handsome than beautiful .
Her face was captivating by reason of a certain frankness of expression and a contradictory subtle play of features .
Her manner was engaging .
Robert rolled a cigarette .
He smoked cigarettes because he could not afford cigars , he said .
He had a cigar in his pocket which Mr. Pontellier had presented him with , and he was saving it for his after-dinner smoke .
This seemed quite proper and natural on his part .
In coloring he was not unlike his companion .
A clean-shaved face made the resemblance more pronounced than it would otherwise have been .
There rested no shadow of care upon his open countenance .
His eyes gathered in and reflected the light and languor of the summer day .
Mrs. Pontellier reached over for a palm-leaf fan that lay on the porch and began to fan herself , while Robert sent between his lips light puffs from his cigarette .
They chatted incessantly : about the things around them ; their amusing adventure out in the water -- it had again assumed its entertaining aspect ; about the wind , the trees , the people who had gone to the Cheniere ; about the children playing croquet under the oaks , and the Farival twins , who were now performing the overture to “ The Poet and the Peasant . ”
Robert talked a good deal about himself .
He was very young , and did not know any better .
Mrs. Pontellier talked a little about herself for the same reason .
Each was interested in what the other said .
Robert spoke of his intention to go to Mexico in the autumn , where fortune awaited him .
He was always intending to go to Mexico , but some way never got there .
Meanwhile he held on to his modest position in a mercantile house in New Orleans , where an equal familiarity with English , French and Spanish gave him no small value as a clerk and correspondent .
He was spending his summer vacation , as he always did , with his mother at Grand Isle .
In former times , before Robert could remember , “ the house ” had been a summer luxury of the Lebruns .
Now , flanked by its dozen or more cottages , which were always filled with exclusive visitors from the “ Quartier Francais , ” it enabled Madame Lebrun to maintain the easy and comfortable existence which appeared to be her birthright .
Mrs. Pontellier talked about her father 's Mississippi plantation and her girlhood home in the old Kentucky bluegrass country .
She was an American woman , with a small infusion of French which seemed to have been lost in dilution .
She read a letter from her sister , who was away in the East , and who had engaged herself to be married .
Robert was interested , and wanted to know what manner of girls the sisters were , what the father was like , and how long the mother had been dead .
When Mrs. Pontellier folded the letter it was time for her to dress for the early dinner .
“ I see Leonce is n't coming back , ” she said , with a glance in the direction whence her husband had disappeared .
Robert supposed he was not , as there were a good many New Orleans club men over at Klein 's .
When Mrs. Pontellier left him to enter her room , the young man descended the steps and strolled over toward the croquet players , where , during the half-hour before dinner , he amused himself with the little Pontellier children , who were very fond of him .
III It was eleven o'clock that night when Mr. Pontellier returned from Klein 's hotel .
He was in an excellent humor , in high spirits , and very talkative .
His entrance awoke his wife , who was in bed and fast asleep when he came in .
He talked to her while he undressed , telling her anecdotes and bits of news and gossip that he had gathered during the day .
From his trousers pockets he took a fistful of crumpled bank notes and a good deal of silver coin , which he piled on the bureau indiscriminately with keys , knife , handkerchief , and whatever else happened to be in his pockets .
She was overcome with sleep , and answered him with little half utterances .
CHAP .
I. Mary , the heroine of this fiction , was the daughter of Edward , who married Eliza , a gentle , fashionable girl , with a kind of indolence in her temper , which might be termed negative good-nature : her virtues , indeed , were all of that stamp .
She carefully attended to the _ shews _ of things , and her opinions , I should have said prejudices , were such as the generality approved of .
She was educated with the expectation of a large fortune , of course became a mere machine : the homage of her attendants made a great part of her puerile amusements , and she never imagined there were any relative duties for her to fulfil : notions of her own consequence , by these means , were interwoven in her mind , and the years of youth spent in acquiring a few superficial accomplishments , without having any taste for them .
When she was first introduced into the polite circle , she danced with an officer , whom she faintly wished to be united to ; but her father soon after recommending another in a more distinguished rank of life , she readily submitted to his will , and promised to love , honour , and obey , ( a vicious fool , ) as in duty bound .
While they resided in London , they lived in the usual fashionable style , and seldom saw each other ; nor were they much more sociable when they wooed rural felicity for more than half the year , in a delightful country , where Nature , with lavish hand , had scattered beauties around ; for the master , with brute , unconscious gaze , passed them by unobserved , and sought amusement in country sports .
He hunted in the morning , and after eating an immoderate dinner , generally fell asleep : this seasonable rest enabled him to digest the cumbrous load ; he would then visit some of his pretty tenants ; and when he compared their ruddy glow of health with his wife 's countenance , which even rouge could not enliven , it is not necessary to say which a _ gourmand _ would give the preference to .
Their vulgar dance of spirits were infinitely more agreeable to his fancy than her sickly , die-away languor .
Her voice was but the shadow of a sound , and she had , to complete her delicacy , so relaxed her nerves , that she became a mere nothing .
Many such noughts are there in the female world !
yet she had a good opinion of her own merit , -- truly , she said long prayers , -- and sometimes read her Week 's Preparation : she dreaded that horrid place vulgarly called _ hell _ , the regions below ; but whether her 's was a mounting spirit , I can not pretend to determine ; or what sort of a planet would have been proper for her , when she left her _ material _ part in this world , let metaphysicians settle ; I have nothing to say to her unclothed spirit .
As she was sometimes obliged to be alone , or only with her French waiting-maid , she sent to the metropolis for all the new publications , and while she was dressing her hair , and she could turn her eyes from the glass , she ran over those most delightful substitutes for bodily dissipation , novels .
I say bodily , or the animal soul , for a rational one can find no employment in polite circles .
The glare of lights , the studied inelegancies of dress , and the compliments offered up at the shrine of false beauty , are all equally addressed to the senses .
When she could not any longer indulge the caprices of fancy one way , she tried another .
The Platonic Marriage , Eliza Warwick , and some other interesting tales were perused with eagerness .
Nothing could be more natural than the developement of the passions , nor more striking than the views of the human heart .
What delicate struggles !
and uncommonly pretty turns of thought !
The picture that was found on a bramble-bush , the new sensitive-plant , or tree , which caught the swain by the upper-garment , and presented to his ravished eyes a portrait .
-- Fatal image !
-- It planted a thorn in a till then insensible heart , and sent a new kind of a knight-errant into the world .
But even this was nothing to the catastrophe , and the circumstance on which it hung , the hornet settling on the sleeping lover 's face .
What a _ heart-rending _ accident !
She planted , in imitation of those susceptible souls , a rose bush ; but there was not a lover to weep in concert with her , when she watered it with her tears .
-- Alas !
Alas !
If my readers would excuse the sportiveness of fancy , and give me credit for genius , I would go on and tell them such tales as would force the sweet tears of sensibility to flow in copious showers down beautiful cheeks , to the discomposure of rouge , & c. & c. Nay , I would make it so interesting , that the fair peruser should beg the hair-dresser to settle the curls himself , and not interrupt her .
She had besides another resource , two most beautiful dogs , who shared her bed , and reclined on cushions near her all the day .
These she watched with the most assiduous care , and bestowed on them the warmest caresses .
This fondness for animals was not that kind of _ attendrissement _ which makes a person take pleasure in providing for the subsistence and comfort of a living creature ; but it proceeded from vanity , it gave her an opportunity of lisping out the prettiest French expressions of ecstatic fondness , in accents that had never been attuned by tenderness .
She was chaste , according to the vulgar acceptation of the word , that is , she did not make any actual _ faux pas _ ; she feared the world , and was indolent ; but then , to make amends for this seeming self-denial , she read all the sentimental novels , dwelt on the love-scenes , and , had she thought while she read , her mind would have been contaminated ; as she accompanied the lovers to the lonely arbors , and would walk with them by the clear light of the moon .
She wondered her husband did not stay at home .
She was jealous -- why did he not love her , sit by her side , squeeze her hand , and look unutterable things ?
Gentle reader , I will tell thee ; they neither of them felt what they could not utter .
I will not pretend to say that they always annexed an idea to a word ; but they had none of those feelings which are not easily analyzed .
CHAP .
II .
In due time she brought forth a son , a feeble babe ; and the following year a daughter .
After the mother 's throes she felt very few sentiments of maternal tenderness : the children were given to nurses , and she played with her dogs .
Want of exercise prevented the least chance of her recovering strength ; and two or three milk-fevers brought on a consumption , to which her constitution tended .
Her children all died in their infancy , except the two first , and she began to grow fond of the son , as he was remarkably handsome .
For years she divided her time between the sofa , and the card-table .
She thought not of death , though on the borders of the grave ; nor did any of the duties of her station occur to her as necessary .
Her children were left in the nursery ; and when Mary , the little blushing girl , appeared , she would send the awkward thing away .
To own the truth , she was awkward enough , in a house without any play-mates ; for her brother had been sent to school , and she scarcely knew how to employ herself ; she would ramble about the garden , admire the flowers , and play with the dogs .
An old house-keeper told her stories , read to her , and , at last , taught her to read .
Her mother talked of enquiring for a governess when her health would permit ; and , in the interim desired her own maid to teach her French .
As she had learned to read , she perused with avidity every book that came in her way .
Neglected in every respect , and left to the operations of her own mind , she considered every thing that came under her inspection , and learned to think .
She had heard of a separate state , and that angels sometimes visited this earth .
She would sit in a thick wood in the park , and talk to them ; make little songs addressed to them , and sing them to tunes of her own composing ; and her native wood notes wild were sweet and touching .
Her father always exclaimed against female acquirements , and was glad that his wife 's indolence and ill health made her not trouble herself about them .
She had besides another reason , she did not wish to have a fine tall girl brought forward into notice as her daughter ; she still expected to recover , and figure away in the gay world .
Her husband was very tyrannical and passionate ; indeed so very easily irritated when inebriated , that Mary was continually in dread lest he should frighten her mother to death ; her sickness called forth all Mary 's tenderness , and exercised her compassion so continually , that it became more than a match for self-love , and was the governing propensity of her heart through life .
She was violent in her temper ; but she saw her father 's faults , and would weep when obliged to compare his temper with her own .
-- She did more ; artless prayers rose to Heaven for pardon , when she was conscious of having erred ; and her contrition was so exceedingly painful , that she watched diligently the first movements of anger and impatience , to save herself this cruel remorse .
Sublime ideas filled her young mind -- always connected with devotional sentiments ; extemporary effusions of gratitude , and rhapsodies of praise would burst often from her , when she listened to the birds , or pursued the deer .
She would gaze on the moon , and ramble through the gloomy path , observing the various shapes the clouds assumed , and listen to the sea that was not far distant .
The wandering spirits , which she imagined inhabited every part of nature , were her constant friends and confidants .
She began to consider the Great First Cause , formed just notions of his attributes , and , in particular , dwelt on his wisdom and goodness .
Could she have loved her father or mother , had they returned her affection , she would not so soon , perhaps , have sought out a new world .
Her sensibility prompted her to search for an object to love ; on earth it was not to be found : her mother had often disappointed her , and the apparent partiality she shewed to her brother gave her exquisite pain -- produced a kind of habitual melancholy , led her into a fondness for reading tales of woe , and made her almost realize the fictitious distress .
ADVENTURE I .
A SCANDAL IN BOHEMIA I. To Sherlock Holmes she is always THE woman .
I have seldom heard him mention her under any other name .
In his eyes she eclipses and predominates the whole of her sex .
It was not that he felt any emotion akin to love for Irene Adler .
All emotions , and that one particularly , were abhorrent to his cold , precise but admirably balanced mind .
He was , I take it , the most perfect reasoning and observing machine that the world has seen , but as a lover he would have placed himself in a false position .
He never spoke of the softer passions , save with a gibe and a sneer .
They were admirable things for the observer -- excellent for drawing the veil from men 's motives and actions .
But for the trained reasoner to admit such intrusions into his own delicate and finely adjusted temperament was to introduce a distracting factor which might throw a doubt upon all his mental results .
Grit in a sensitive instrument , or a crack in one of his own high-power lenses , would not be more disturbing than a strong emotion in a nature such as his .
And yet there was but one woman to him , and that woman was the late Irene Adler , of dubious and questionable memory .
I had seen little of Holmes lately .
My marriage had drifted us away from each other .
My own complete happiness , and the home-centred interests which rise up around the man who first finds himself master of his own establishment , were sufficient to absorb all my attention , while Holmes , who loathed every form of society with his whole Bohemian soul , remained in our lodgings in Baker Street , buried among his old books , and alternating from week to week between cocaine and ambition , the drowsiness of the drug , and the fierce energy of his own keen nature .
He was still , as ever , deeply attracted by the study of crime , and occupied his immense faculties and extraordinary powers of observation in following out those clues , and clearing up those mysteries which had been abandoned as hopeless by the official police .
From time to time I heard some vague account of his doings : of his summons to Odessa in the case of the Trepoff murder , of his clearing up of the singular tragedy of the Atkinson brothers at Trincomalee , and finally of the mission which he had accomplished so delicately and successfully for the reigning family of Holland .
Beyond these signs of his activity , however , which I merely shared with all the readers of the daily press , I knew little of my former friend and companion .
One night -- it was on the twentieth of March , 1888 -- I was returning from a journey to a patient ( for I had now returned to civil practice ) , when my way led me through Baker Street .
As I passed the well-remembered door , which must always be associated in my mind with my wooing , and with the dark incidents of the Study in Scarlet , I was seized with a keen desire to see Holmes again , and to know how he was employing his extraordinary powers .
His rooms were brilliantly lit , and , even as I looked up , I saw his tall , spare figure pass twice in a dark silhouette against the blind .
He was pacing the room swiftly , eagerly , with his head sunk upon his chest and his hands clasped behind him .
To me , who knew his every mood and habit , his attitude and manner told their own story .
He was at work again .
He had risen out of his drug-created dreams and was hot upon the scent of some new problem .
I rang the bell and was shown up to the chamber which had formerly been in part my own .
His manner was not effusive .
It seldom was ; but he was glad , I think , to see me .
With hardly a word spoken , but with a kindly eye , he waved me to an armchair , threw across his case of cigars , and indicated a spirit case and a gasogene in the corner .
Then he stood before the fire and looked me over in his singular introspective fashion .
" Wedlock suits you , " he remarked .
" I think , Watson , that you have put on seven and a half pounds since I saw you . "
" Seven ! "
I answered .
" Indeed , I should have thought a little more .
Just a trifle more , I fancy , Watson .
And in practice again , I observe .
You did not tell me that you intended to go into harness . "
" Then , how do you know ? "
" I see it , I deduce it .
How do I know that you have been getting yourself very wet lately , and that you have a most clumsy and careless servant girl ? "
" My dear Holmes , " said I , " this is too much .
You would certainly have been burned , had you lived a few centuries ago .
It is true that I had a country walk on Thursday and came home in a dreadful mess , but as I have changed my clothes I ca n't imagine how you deduce it .
As to Mary Jane , she is incorrigible , and my wife has given her notice , but there , again , I fail to see how you work it out . "
He chuckled to himself and rubbed his long , nervous hands together .
" It is simplicity itself , " said he ; " my eyes tell me that on the inside of your left shoe , just where the firelight strikes it , the leather is scored by six almost parallel cuts .
Obviously they have been caused by someone who has very carelessly scraped round the edges of the sole in order to remove crusted mud from it .
Hence , you see , my double deduction that you had been out in vile weather , and that you had a particularly malignant boot-slitting specimen of the London slavey .
As to your practice , if a gentleman walks into my rooms smelling of iodoform , with a black mark of nitrate of silver upon his right forefinger , and a bulge on the right side of his top-hat to show where he has secreted his stethoscope , I must be dull , indeed , if I do not pronounce him to be an active member of the medical profession . "
I could not help laughing at the ease with which he explained his process of deduction .
" When I hear you give your reasons , " I remarked , " the thing always appears to me to be so ridiculously simple that I could easily do it myself , though at each successive instance of your reasoning I am baffled until you explain your process .
And yet I believe that my eyes are as good as yours . "
" Quite so , " he answered , lighting a cigarette , and throwing himself down into an armchair .
" You see , but you do not observe .
The distinction is clear .
For example , you have frequently seen the steps which lead up from the hall to this room . "
" Frequently . "
" How often ? "
" Well , some hundreds of times . "
" Then how many are there ? "
" How many ?
I do n't know . "
" Quite so !
You have not observed .
And yet you have seen .
That is just my point .
Now , I know that there are seventeen steps , because I have both seen and observed .
By-the-way , since you are interested in these little problems , and since you are good enough to chronicle one or two of my trifling experiences , you may be interested in this . "
He threw over a sheet of thick , pink-tinted note-paper which had been lying open upon the table .
" It came by the last post , " said he .
" Read it aloud . "
The note was undated , and without either signature or address .
" There will call upon you to-night , at a quarter to eight o'clock , " it said , " a gentleman who desires to consult you upon a matter of the very deepest moment .
Your recent services to one of the royal houses of Europe have shown that you are one who may safely be trusted with matters which are of an importance which can hardly be exaggerated .
This account of you we have from all quarters received .
Be in your chamber then at that hour , and do not take it amiss if your visitor wear a mask . "
" This is indeed a mystery , " I remarked .
" What do you imagine that it means ? "
" I have no data yet .
It is a capital mistake to theorize before one has data .
Insensibly one begins to twist facts to suit theories , instead of theories to suit facts .
But the note itself .
What do you deduce from it ? "
I carefully examined the writing , and the paper upon which it was written .
" The man who wrote it was presumably well to do , " I remarked , endeavouring to imitate my companion 's processes .
" Such paper could not be bought under half a crown a packet .
It is peculiarly strong and stiff . "
" Peculiar -- that is the very word , " said Holmes .
" It is not an English paper at all .
Hold it up to the light . "
I did so , and saw a large " E " with a small " g , " a " P , " and a large " G " with a small " t " woven into the texture of the paper .
" What do you make of that ? " asked Holmes .
" The name of the maker , no doubt ; or his monogram , rather . "
" Not at all .
The ' G ' with the small ' t ' stands for ' Gesellschaft , ' which is the German for ' Company . '
It is a customary contraction like our ' Co. ' ' P , ' of course , stands for ' Papier . '
Now for the ' Eg . '
Let us glance at our Continental Gazetteer . "
He took down a heavy brown volume from his shelves .
" Eglow , Eglonitz -- here we are , Egria .
It is in a German-speaking country -- in Bohemia , not far from Carlsbad .
' Remarkable as being the scene of the death of Wallenstein , and for its numerous glass-factories and paper-mills . '
Ha , ha , my boy , what do you make of that ? "
His eyes sparkled , and he sent up a great blue triumphant cloud from his cigarette .
" The paper was made in Bohemia , " I said .
" Precisely .
And the man who wrote the note is a German .
Do you note the peculiar construction of the sentence -- ' This account of you we have from all quarters received . '
A Frenchman or Russian could not have written that .
It is the German who is so uncourteous to his verbs .
It only remains , therefore , to discover what is wanted by this German who writes upon Bohemian paper and prefers wearing a mask to showing his face .
And here he comes , if I am not mistaken , to resolve all our doubts . "
CHAPTER I .
THE TWO POETS OF SAFFRON PARK THE suburb of Saffron Park lay on the sunset side of London , as red and ragged as a cloud of sunset .
It was built of a bright brick throughout ; its sky-line was fantastic , and even its ground plan was wild .
It had been the outburst of a speculative builder , faintly tinged with art , who called its architecture sometimes Elizabethan and sometimes Queen Anne , apparently under the impression that the two sovereigns were identical .
It was described with some justice as an artistic colony , though it never in any definable way produced any art .
But although its pretensions to be an intellectual centre were a little vague , its pretensions to be a pleasant place were quite indisputable .
The stranger who looked for the first time at the quaint red houses could only think how very oddly shaped the people must be who could fit in to them .
Nor when he met the people was he disappointed in this respect .
The place was not only pleasant , but perfect , if once he could regard it not as a deception but rather as a dream .
Even if the people were not “ artists , ” the whole was nevertheless artistic .
That young man with the long , auburn hair and the impudent face -- that young man was not really a poet ; but surely he was a poem .
That old gentleman with the wild , white beard and the wild , white hat -- that venerable humbug was not really a philosopher ; but at least he was the cause of philosophy in others .
That scientific gentleman with the bald , egg-like head and the bare , bird-like neck had no real right to the airs of science that he assumed .
He had not discovered anything new in biology ; but what biological creature could he have discovered more singular than himself ?
Thus , and thus only , the whole place had properly to be regarded ; it had to be considered not so much as a workshop for artists , but as a frail but finished work of art .
A man who stepped into its social atmosphere felt as if he had stepped into a written comedy .
More especially this attractive unreality fell upon it about nightfall , when the extravagant roofs were dark against the afterglow and the whole insane village seemed as separate as a drifting cloud .
This again was more strongly true of the many nights of local festivity , when the little gardens were often illuminated , and the big Chinese lanterns glowed in the dwarfish trees like some fierce and monstrous fruit .
And this was strongest of all on one particular evening , still vaguely remembered in the locality , of which the auburn-haired poet was the hero .
It was not by any means the only evening of which he was the hero .
On many nights those passing by his little back garden might hear his high , didactic voice laying down the law to men and particularly to women .
The attitude of women in such cases was indeed one of the paradoxes of the place .
Most of the women were of the kind vaguely called emancipated , and professed some protest against male supremacy .
Yet these new women would always pay to a man the extravagant compliment which no ordinary woman ever pays to him , that of listening while he is talking .
And Mr. Lucian Gregory , the red-haired poet , was really ( in some sense ) a man worth listening to , even if one only laughed at the end of it .
He put the old cant of the lawlessness of art and the art of lawlessness with a certain impudent freshness which gave at least a momentary pleasure .
He was helped in some degree by the arresting oddity of his appearance , which he worked , as the phrase goes , for all it was worth .
His dark red hair parted in the middle was literally like a woman ’s , and curved into the slow curls of a virgin in a pre-Raphaelite picture .
From within this almost saintly oval , however , his face projected suddenly broad and brutal , the chin carried forward with a look of cockney contempt .
This combination at once tickled and terrified the nerves of a neurotic population .
He seemed like a walking blasphemy , a blend of the angel and the ape .
This particular evening , if it is remembered for nothing else , will be remembered in that place for its strange sunset .
It looked like the end of the world .
All the heaven seemed covered with a quite vivid and palpable plumage ; you could only say that the sky was full of feathers , and of feathers that almost brushed the face .
Across the great part of the dome they were grey , with the strangest tints of violet and mauve and an unnatural pink or pale green ; but towards the west the whole grew past description , transparent and passionate , and the last red-hot plumes of it covered up the sun like something too good to be seen .
The whole was so close about the earth , as to express nothing but a violent secrecy .
The very empyrean seemed to be a secret .
It expressed that splendid smallness which is the soul of local patriotism .
The very sky seemed small .
I say that there are some inhabitants who may remember the evening if only by that oppressive sky .
There are others who may remember it because it marked the first appearance in the place of the second poet of Saffron Park .
For a long time the red-haired revolutionary had reigned without a rival ; it was upon the night of the sunset that his solitude suddenly ended .
The new poet , who introduced himself by the name of Gabriel Syme was a very mild-looking mortal , with a fair , pointed beard and faint , yellow hair .
But an impression grew that he was less meek than he looked .
He signalised his entrance by differing with the established poet , Gregory , upon the whole nature of poetry .
He said that he ( Syme ) was poet of law , a poet of order ; nay , he said he was a poet of respectability .
So all the Saffron Parkers looked at him as if he had that moment fallen out of that impossible sky .
In fact , Mr. Lucian Gregory , the anarchic poet , connected the two events .
“ It may well be , ” he said , in his sudden lyrical manner , “ it may well be on such a night of clouds and cruel colours that there is brought forth upon the earth such a portent as a respectable poet .
You say you are a poet of law ; I say you are a contradiction in terms .
I only wonder there were not comets and earthquakes on the night you appeared in this garden . ”
The man with the meek blue eyes and the pale , pointed beard endured these thunders with a certain submissive solemnity .
The third party of the group , Gregory ’s sister Rosamond , who had her brother ’s braids of red hair , but a kindlier face underneath them , laughed with such mixture of admiration and disapproval as she gave commonly to the family oracle .
Gregory resumed in high oratorical good humour .
“ An artist is identical with an anarchist , ” he cried .
“ You might transpose the words anywhere .
An anarchist is an artist .
The man who throws a bomb is an artist , because he prefers a great moment to everything .
He sees how much more valuable is one burst of blazing light , one peal of perfect thunder , than the mere common bodies of a few shapeless policemen .
An artist disregards all governments , abolishes all conventions .
The poet delights in disorder only .
If it were not so , the most poetical thing in the world would be the Underground Railway . ”
“ So it is , ” said Mr. Syme .
“ Nonsense ! ” said Gregory , who was very rational when anyone else attempted paradox .
“ Why do all the clerks and navvies in the railway trains look so sad and tired , so very sad and tired ?
I will tell you .
It is because they know that the train is going right .
It is because they know that whatever place they have taken a ticket for that place they will reach .
It is because after they have passed Sloane Square they know that the next station must be Victoria , and nothing but Victoria .
Oh , their wild rapture !
oh , their eyes like stars and their souls again in Eden , if the next station were unaccountably Baker Street ! ”
“ It is you who are unpoetical , ” replied the poet Syme .
“ If what you say of clerks is true , they can only be as prosaic as your poetry .
The rare , strange thing is to hit the mark ; the gross , obvious thing is to miss it .
We feel it is epical when man with one wild arrow strikes a distant bird .
Is it not also epical when man with one wild engine strikes a distant station ?
Chaos is dull ; because in chaos the train might indeed go anywhere , to Baker Street or to Bagdad .
But man is a magician , and his whole magic is in this , that he does say Victoria , and lo !
it is Victoria .
No , take your books of mere poetry and prose ; let me read a time table , with tears of pride .
Take your Byron , who commemorates the defeats of man ; give me Bradshaw , who commemorates his victories .
Give me Bradshaw , I say ! ”
“ Must you go ? ” inquired Gregory sarcastically .
“ I tell you , ” went on Syme with passion , “ that every time a train comes in I feel that it has broken past batteries of besiegers , and that man has won a battle against chaos .
You say contemptuously that when one has left Sloane Square one must come to Victoria .
I say that one might do a thousand things instead , and that whenever I really come there I have the sense of hairbreadth escape .
And when I hear the guard shout out the word ‘ Victoria , ’ it is not an unmeaning word .
It is to me the cry of a herald announcing conquest .
It is to me indeed ‘ Victoria ’ ; it is the victory of Adam . ”
Gregory wagged his heavy , red head with a slow and sad smile .
“ And even then , ” he said , “ we poets always ask the question , ‘ And what is Victoria now that you have got there ? ’
You think Victoria is like the New Jerusalem .
We know that the New Jerusalem will only be like Victoria .
Yes , the poet will be discontented even in the streets of heaven .
The poet is always in revolt . ”
“ There again , ” said Syme irritably , “ what is there poetical about being in revolt ?
You might as well say that it is poetical to be sea-sick .
Being sick is a revolt .
Both being sick and being rebellious may be the wholesome thing on certain desperate occasions ; but I ’m hanged if I can see why they are poetical .
Revolt in the abstract is -- revolting .
It ’s mere vomiting . ”
VOLUME I CHAPTER I .
A BOARDING SCHOOL .
“ ARE you for a walk , ” said Montraville to his companion , as they arose from table ; “ are you for a walk ?
or shall we order the chaise and proceed to Portsmouth ? ”
Belcour preferred the former ; and they sauntered out to view the town , and to make remarks on the inhabitants , as they returned from church .
Montraville was a Lieutenant in the army : Belcour was his brother officer : they had been to take leave of their friends previous to their departure for America , and were now returning to Portsmouth , where the troops waited orders for embarkation .
They had stopped at Chichester to dine ; and knowing they had sufficient time to reach the place of destination before dark , and yet allow them a walk , had resolved , it being Sunday afternoon , to take a survey of the Chichester ladies as they returned from their devotions .
They had gratified their curiosity , and were preparing to return to the inn without honouring any of the belles with particular notice , when Madame Du Pont , at the head of her school , descended from the church .
Such an assemblage of youth and innocence naturally attracted the young soldiers : they stopped ; and , as the little cavalcade passed , almost involuntarily pulled off their hats .
A tall , elegant girl looked at Montraville and blushed : he instantly recollected the features of Charlotte Temple , whom he had once seen and danced with at a ball at Portsmouth .
At that time he thought on her only as a very lovely child , she being then only thirteen ; but the improvement two years had made in her person , and the blush of recollection which suffused her cheeks as she passed , awakened in his bosom new and pleasing ideas .
Vanity led him to think that pleasure at again beholding him might have occasioned the emotion he had witnessed , and the same vanity led him to wish to see her again .
“ She is the sweetest girl in the world , ” said he , as he entered the inn .
Belcour stared .
“ Did you not notice her ? ” continued Montraville : “ she had on a blue bonnet , and with a pair of lovely eyes of the same colour , has contrived to make me feel devilish odd about the heart . ”
“ Pho , ” said Belcour , “ a musket ball from our friends , the Americans , may in less than two months make you feel worse . ”
“ I never think of the future , ” replied Montraville ; “ but am determined to make the most of the present , and would willingly compound with any kind Familiar who would inform me who the girl is , and how I might be likely to obtain an interview . ”
But no kind Familiar at that time appearing , and the chaise which they had ordered , driving up to the door , Montraville and his companion were obliged to take leave of Chichester and its fair inhabitant , and proceed on their journey .
But Charlotte had made too great an impression on his mind to be easily eradicated : having therefore spent three whole days in thinking on her and in endeavouring to form some plan for seeing her , he determined to set off for Chichester , and trust to chance either to favour or frustrate his designs .
Arriving at the verge of the town , he dismounted , and sending the servant forward with the horses , proceeded toward the place , where , in the midst of an extensive pleasure ground , stood the mansion which contained the lovely Charlotte Temple .
Montraville leaned on a broken gate , and looked earnestly at the house .
The wall which surrounded it was high , and perhaps the Argus ’s who guarded the Hesperian fruit within , were more watchful than those famed of old .
“‘ Tis a romantic attempt , ” said he ; “ and should I even succeed in seeing and conversing with her , it can be productive of no good : I must of necessity leave England in a few days , and probably may never return ; why then should I endeavour to engage the affections of this lovely girl , only to leave her a prey to a thousand inquietudes , of which at present she has no idea ?
I will return to Portsmouth and think no more about her . ”
The evening now was closed ; a serene stillness reigned ; and the chaste Queen of Night with her silver crescent faintly illuminated the hemisphere .
The mind of Montraville was hushed into composure by the serenity of the surrounding objects .
“ I will think on her no more , ” said he , and turned with an intention to leave the place ; but as he turned , he saw the gate which led to the pleasure grounds open , and two women come out , who walked arm-in-arm across the field .
“ I will at least see who these are , ” said he .
He overtook them , and giving them the compliments of the evening , begged leave to see them into the more frequented parts of the town : but how was he delighted , when , waiting for an answer , he discovered , under the concealment of a large bonnet , the face of Charlotte Temple .
He soon found means to ingratiate himself with her companion , who was a French teacher at the school , and , at parting , slipped a letter he had purposely written , into Charlotte ’s hand , and five guineas into that of Mademoiselle , who promised she would endeavour to bring her young charge into the field again the next evening .
CHAPTER II .
DOMESTIC CONCERNS .
MR. Temple was the youngest son of a nobleman whose fortune was by no means adequate to the antiquity , grandeur , and I may add , pride of the family .
He saw his elder brother made completely wretched by marrying a disagreeable woman , whose fortune helped to prop the sinking dignity of the house ; and he beheld his sisters legally prostituted to old , decrepid men , whose titles gave them consequence in the eyes of the world , and whose affluence rendered them splendidly miserable .
“ I will not sacrifice internal happiness for outward shew , ” said he : “ I will seek Content ; and , if I find her in a cottage , will embrace her with as much cordiality as I should if seated on a throne . ”
Mr. Temple possessed a small estate of about five hundred pounds a year ; and with that he resolved to preserve independence , to marry where the feelings of his heart should direct him , and to confine his expenses within the limits of his income .
He had a heart open to every generous feeling of humanity , and a hand ready to dispense to those who wanted part of the blessings he enjoyed himself .
As he was universally known to be the friend of the unfortunate , his advice and bounty was frequently solicited ; nor was it seldom that he sought out indigent merit , and raised it from obscurity , confining his own expenses within a very narrow compass .
“ You are a benevolent fellow , ” said a young officer to him one day ; “ and I have a great mind to give you a fine subject to exercise the goodness of your heart upon . ”
“ You can not oblige me more , ” said Temple , “ than to point out any way by which I can be serviceable to my fellow creatures . ”
“ Come along then , ” said the young man , “ we will go and visit a man who is not in so good a lodging as he deserves ; and , were it not that he has an angel with him , who comforts and supports him , he must long since have sunk under his misfortunes . ”
The young man ’s heart was too full to proceed ; and Temple , unwilling to irritate his feelings by making further enquiries , followed him in silence , til they arrived at the Fleet prison .
The officer enquired for Captain Eldridge : a person led them up several pair of dirty stairs , and pointing to a door which led to a miserable , small apartment , said that was the Captain ’s room , and retired .
The officer , whose name was Blakeney , tapped at the door , and was bid to enter by a voice melodiously soft .
He opened the door , and discovered to Temple a scene which rivetted him to the spot with astonishment .
The apartment , though small , and bearing strong marks of poverty , was neat in the extreme .
In an arm-chair , his head reclined upon his hand , his eyes fixed on a book which lay open before him , sat an aged man in a Lieutenant ’s uniform , which , though threadbare , would sooner call a blush of shame into the face of those who could neglect real merit , than cause the hectic of confusion to glow on the cheeks of him who wore it .
Beside him sat a lovely creature busied in painting a fan mount .
She was fair as the lily , but sorrow had nipped the rose in her cheek before it was half blown .
Her eyes were blue ; and her hair , which was light brown , was slightly confined under a plain muslin cap , tied round with a black ribbon ; a white linen gown and plain lawn handkerchief composed the remainder of her dress ; and in this simple attire , she was more irresistibly charming to such a heart as Temple ’s , than she would have been , if adorned with all the splendor of a courtly belle .
When they entered , the old man arose from his seat , and shaking Blakeney by the hand with great cordiality , offered Temple his chair ; and there being but three in the room , seated himself on the side of his little bed with evident composure .
“ This is a strange place , ” said he to Temple , “ to receive visitors of distinction in ; but we must fit our feelings to our station .
While I am not ashamed to own the cause which brought me here , why should I blush at my situation ?
Our misfortunes are not our faults ; and were it not for that poor girl -- ” Here the philosopher was lost in the father .
He rose hastily from his seat , and walking toward the window , wiped off a tear which he was afraid would tarnish the cheek of a sailor .
Temple cast his eye on Miss Eldridge : a pellucid drop had stolen from her eyes , and fallen upon a rose she was painting .
It blotted and discoloured the flower .
“‘ Tis emblematic , ” said he mentally : “ the rose of youth and health soon fades when watered by the tear of affliction . ”
“ My friend Blakeney , ” said he , addressing the old man , “ told me I could be of service to you : be so kind then , dear Sir , as to point out some way in which I can relieve the anxiety of your heart and increase the pleasures of my own . ”
CHAPTER 1 The studio was filled with the rich odour of roses , and when the light summer wind stirred amidst the trees of the garden , there came through the open door the heavy scent of the lilac , or the more delicate perfume of the pink-flowering thorn .
From the corner of the divan of Persian saddle-bags on which he was lying , smoking , as was his custom , innumerable cigarettes , Lord Henry Wotton could just catch the gleam of the honey-sweet and honey-coloured blossoms of a laburnum , whose tremulous branches seemed hardly able to bear the burden of a beauty so flamelike as theirs ; and now and then the fantastic shadows of birds in flight flitted across the long tussore-silk curtains that were stretched in front of the huge window , producing a kind of momentary Japanese effect , and making him think of those pallid , jade-faced painters of Tokyo who , through the medium of an art that is necessarily immobile , seek to convey the sense of swiftness and motion .
The sullen murmur of the bees shouldering their way through the long unmown grass , or circling with monotonous insistence round the dusty gilt horns of the straggling woodbine , seemed to make the stillness more oppressive .
The dim roar of London was like the bourdon note of a distant organ .
In the centre of the room , clamped to an upright easel , stood the full-length portrait of a young man of extraordinary personal beauty , and in front of it , some little distance away , was sitting the artist himself , Basil Hallward , whose sudden disappearance some years ago caused , at the time , such public excitement and gave rise to so many strange conjectures .
As the painter looked at the gracious and comely form he had so skilfully mirrored in his art , a smile of pleasure passed across his face , and seemed about to linger there .
But he suddenly started up , and closing his eyes , placed his fingers upon the lids , as though he sought to imprison within his brain some curious dream from which he feared he might awake .
" It is your best work , Basil , the best thing you have ever done , " said Lord Henry languidly .
" You must certainly send it next year to the Grosvenor .
The Academy is too large and too vulgar .
Whenever I have gone there , there have been either so many people that I have not been able to see the pictures , which was dreadful , or so many pictures that I have not been able to see the people , which was worse .
The Grosvenor is really the only place . "
" I do n't think I shall send it anywhere , " he answered , tossing his head back in that odd way that used to make his friends laugh at him at Oxford .
" No , I wo n't send it anywhere . "
Lord Henry elevated his eyebrows and looked at him in amazement through the thin blue wreaths of smoke that curled up in such fanciful whorls from his heavy , opium-tainted cigarette .
" Not send it anywhere ?
My dear fellow , why ?
Have you any reason ?
What odd chaps you painters are !
You do anything in the world to gain a reputation .
As soon as you have one , you seem to want to throw it away .
It is silly of you , for there is only one thing in the world worse than being talked about , and that is not being talked about .
A portrait like this would set you far above all the young men in England , and make the old men quite jealous , if old men are ever capable of any emotion . "
" I know you will laugh at me , " he replied , " but I really ca n't exhibit it .
I have put too much of myself into it . "
Lord Henry stretched himself out on the divan and laughed .
" Yes , I knew you would ; but it is quite true , all the same . "
" Too much of yourself in it !
Upon my word , Basil , I did n't know you were so vain ; and I really ca n't see any resemblance between you , with your rugged strong face and your coal-black hair , and this young Adonis , who looks as if he was made out of ivory and rose-leaves .
Why , my dear Basil , he is a Narcissus , and you -- well , of course you have an intellectual expression and all that .
But beauty , real beauty , ends where an intellectual expression begins .
Intellect is in itself a mode of exaggeration , and destroys the harmony of any face .
The moment one sits down to think , one becomes all nose , or all forehead , or something horrid .
Look at the successful men in any of the learned professions .
How perfectly hideous they are !
Except , of course , in the Church .
But then in the Church they do n't think .
A bishop keeps on saying at the age of eighty what he was told to say when he was a boy of eighteen , and as a natural consequence he always looks absolutely delightful .
Your mysterious young friend , whose name you have never told me , but whose picture really fascinates me , never thinks .
I feel quite sure of that .
He is some brainless beautiful creature who should be always here in winter when we have no flowers to look at , and always here in summer when we want something to chill our intelligence .
Do n't flatter yourself , Basil : you are not in the least like him . "
" You do n't understand me , Harry , " answered the artist .
" Of course I am not like him .
I know that perfectly well .
Indeed , I should be sorry to look like him .
You shrug your shoulders ?
I am telling you the truth .
There is a fatality about all physical and intellectual distinction , the sort of fatality that seems to dog through history the faltering steps of kings .
It is better not to be different from one 's fellows .
The ugly and the stupid have the best of it in this world .
They can sit at their ease and gape at the play .
If they know nothing of victory , they are at least spared the knowledge of defeat .
They live as we all should live -- undisturbed , indifferent , and without disquiet .
They neither bring ruin upon others , nor ever receive it from alien hands .
Your rank and wealth , Harry ; my brains , such as they are -- my art , whatever it may be worth ; Dorian Gray 's good looks -- we shall all suffer for what the gods have given us , suffer terribly . "
" Dorian Gray ?
Is that his name ? "
asked Lord Henry , walking across the studio towards Basil Hallward .
" Yes , that is his name .
I did n't intend to tell it to you . "
" But why not ? "
" Oh , I ca n't explain .
When I like people immensely , I never tell their names to any one .
It is like surrendering a part of them .
I have grown to love secrecy .
It seems to be the one thing that can make modern life mysterious or marvellous to us .
The commonest thing is delightful if one only hides it .
When I leave town now I never tell my people where I am going .
If I did , I would lose all my pleasure .
It is a silly habit , I dare say , but somehow it seems to bring a great deal of romance into one 's life .
I suppose you think me awfully foolish about it ? "
" Not at all , " answered Lord Henry , " not at all , my dear Basil .
You seem to forget that I am married , and the one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception absolutely necessary for both parties .
I never know where my wife is , and my wife never knows what I am doing .
When we meet -- we do meet occasionally , when we dine out together , or go down to the Duke 's -- we tell each other the most absurd stories with the most serious faces .
My wife is very good at it -- much better , in fact , than I am .
She never gets confused over her dates , and I always do .
But when she does find me out , she makes no row at all .
I sometimes wish she would ; but she merely laughs at me . "
" I hate the way you talk about your married life , Harry , " said Basil Hallward , strolling towards the door that led into the garden .
" I believe that you are really a very good husband , but that you are thoroughly ashamed of your own virtues .
You are an extraordinary fellow .
You never say a moral thing , and you never do a wrong thing .
Your cynicism is simply a pose . "
" Being natural is simply a pose , and the most irritating pose I know , " cried Lord Henry , laughing ; and the two young men went out into the garden together and ensconced themselves on a long bamboo seat that stood in the shade of a tall laurel bush .
The sunlight slipped over the polished leaves .
In the grass , white daisies were tremulous .
After a pause , Lord Henry pulled out his watch .
" I am afraid I must be going , Basil , " he murmured , " and before I go , I insist on your answering a question I put to you some time ago . "
" What is that ? "
said the painter , keeping his eyes fixed on the ground .
" You know quite well . "
" I do not , Harry . "
" Well , I will tell you what it is .
I want you to explain to me why you wo n't exhibit Dorian Gray 's picture .
I want the real reason . "
" I told you the real reason . "
" No , you did not .
You said it was because there was too much of yourself in it .
Now , that is childish . "
" Harry , " said Basil Hallward , looking him straight in the face , " every portrait that is painted with feeling is a portrait of the artist , not of the sitter .
The sitter is merely the accident , the occasion .
It is not he who is revealed by the painter ; it is rather the painter who , on the coloured canvas , reveals himself .
The reason I will not exhibit this picture is that I am afraid that I have shown in it the secret of my own soul . "
Lord Henry laughed .
" And what is that ? "
he asked .
" I will tell you , " said Hallward ; but an expression of perplexity came over his face .
Chapter I .
The Missing Heir .
" Uncle , you are not looking well to-night . "
" I 'm not well , Florence .
I sometimes doubt if I shall ever be any better . "
" Surely , uncle , you can not mean ---- " " Yes , my child , I have reason to believe that I am nearing the end . "
" I can not bear to hear you speak so , uncle , " said Florence Linden , in irrepressible agitation .
" You are not an old man .
You are but fifty-four . "
" True , Florence , but it is not years only that make a man old .
Two great sorrows have embittered my life .
First , the death of my dearly beloved wife , and next , the loss of my boy , Harvey . "
" It is long since I have heard you refer to my cousin 's loss .
I thought you had become reconciled -- no , I do not mean that , -- I thought your regret might be less poignant . "
" I have not permitted myself to speak of it , but I have never ceased to think of it day and night . "
John Linden paused sadly , then resumed : " If he had died , I might , as you say , have become reconciled ; but he was abducted at the age of four by a revengeful servant whom I had discharged from my employment .
Heaven knows whether he is living or dead , but it is impressed upon my mind that he still lives , it may be in misery , it may be as a criminal , while I , his unhappy father , live on in luxury which I can not enjoy , with no one to care for me ---- " Florence Linden sank impulsively on her knees beside her uncle 's chair .
" Do n't say that , uncle , " she pleaded .
" You know that I love you , Uncle John . "
" And I , too , uncle . "
There was a shade of jealousy in the voice of Curtis Waring as he entered the library through the open door , and approaching his uncle , pressed his hand .
He was a tall , dark-complexioned man , of perhaps thirty-five , with shifty , black eyes and thin lips , shaded by a dark mustache .
It was not a face to trust .
Even when he smiled the expression of his face did not soften .
Yet he could moderate his voice so as to express tenderness and sympathy .
He was the son of an elder sister of Mr. Linden , while Florence was the daughter of a younger brother .
Both were orphans , and both formed a part of Mr. Linden 's household , and owed everything to his bounty .
Curtis was supposed to be in some business downtown ; but he received a liberal allowance from his uncle , and often drew upon him for outside assistance .
As he stood with his uncle 's hand in his , he was necessarily brought near Florence , who instinctively drew a little away , with a slight shudder indicating repugnance .
Slight as it was , Curtis detected it , and his face darkened .
John Linden looked from one to the other .
" Yes , " he said , " I must not forget that I have a nephew and a niece .
You are both dear to me , but no one can take the place of the boy I have lost . "
" But it is so long ago , uncle , " said Curtis .
" It must be fourteen years . "
" It is fourteen years . "
" And the boy is long since dead ! "
" No , no ! " said John Linden , vehemently .
" I do not , I will not , believe it .
He still lives , and I live only in the hope of one day clasping him in my arms . "
" That is very improbable , uncle , " said Curtis , in a tone of annoyance .
" There is n't one chance in a hundred that my cousin still lives .
The grave has closed over him long since .
The sooner you make up your mind to accept the inevitable the better . "
The drawn features of the old man showed that the words had a depressing effect upon his mind , but Florence interrupted her cousin with an indignant protest .
" How can you speak so , Curtis ? " she exclaimed .
" Leave Uncle John the hope that he has so long cherished .
I have a presentiment that Harvey still lives . "
John Linden 's face brightened up " You , too , believe it possible , Florence ? " he said , eagerly .
" Yes , uncle .
I not only believe it possible , but probable .
How old would Harvey be if he still lived ? "
" Eighteen -- nearly a year older than yourself . "
" How strange !
I always think of him as a little boy . "
" And I , too , Florence .
He rises before me in his little velvet suit , as he was when I last saw him , with his sweet , boyish face , in which his mother 's looks were reflected . "
" Yet , if still living , " interrupted Curtis , harshly , " he is a rough street boy , perchance serving his time at Blackwell 's Island , and , a hardened young ruffian , whom it would be bitter mortification to recognize as your son . "
" That 's the sorrowful part of it , " said his uncle , in a voice of anguish .
" That is what I most dread . "
" Then , since even if he were living you would not care to recognize him , why not cease to think of him , or else regard him as dead ? "
" Curtis Waring , have you no heart ? " demanded Florence , indignantly .
" Indeed , Florence , you ought to know , " said Curtis , sinking his voice into softly modulated accents .
" I know nothing of it , " said Florence , coldly , rising from her recumbent position , and drawing aloof from Curtis .
" You know that the dearest wish of my heart is to find favor in your eyes .
Uncle , you know my wish , and approve of it , do you not ? "
" Yes , Curtis ; you and Florence are equally dear to me , and it is my hope that you may be united .
In that case , there will be no division of my fortune .
It will be left to you jointly . "
" Believe me , sir , " said Curtis , with faltering voice , feigning an emotion which he did not feel , " believe me , that I fully appreciate your goodness .
I am sure Florence joins with me ---- " " Florence can speak for herself , " said his cousin , coldly .
" My uncle needs no assurance from me .
He is always kind , and I am always grateful . "
John Linden seemed absorbed in thought .
" I do not doubt your affection , " he said ; " and I have shown it by making you my joint heirs in the event of your marriage ; but it is only fair to say that my property goes to my boy , if he still lives . "
" But , sir , " protested Curtis , " is not that likely to create unnecessary trouble ?
It can never be known , and meanwhile ---- " " You and Florence will hold the property in trust . "
" Have you so specified in your will ? " asked Curtis .
" I have made two wills .
Both are in yonder secretary .
By the first the property is bequeathed to you and Florence .
By the second and later , it goes to my lost boy in the event of his recovery .
Of course , you and Florence are not forgotten , but the bulk of the property goes to Harvey . "
" I sincerely wish the boy might be restored to you , " said Curtis ; but his tone belied his words .
" Believe me , the loss of the property would affect me little , if you could be made happy by realizing your warmest desire ; but , uncle , I think it only the part of a friend to point out to you , as I have already done , the baselessness of any such expectation . "
" It may be as you say , Curtis , " said his uncle , with a sigh .
" If I were thoroughly convinced of it , I would destroy the later will , and leave my property absolutely to you and Florence . "
" No , uncle , " said Florence , impulsively , " make no change ; let the will stand . "
Curtis , screened from his uncle 's view , darted a glance of bitter indignation at Florence .
" Is the girl mad ? " he muttered to himself .
" Must she forever balk me ? "
" Let it be so for the present , then , " said Mr. Linden , wearily .
" Curtis , will you ring the bell ?
I am tired , and shall retire to my couch early . "
" Let me help you , Uncle John , " said Florence , eagerly .
" It is too much for your strength , my child .
I am growing more and more helpless . "
" I , too , can help , " said Curtis .
John Linden , supported on either side by his nephew and niece , left the room , and was assisted to his chamber .
Curtis and Florence returned to the library .
" Florence , " said her cousin , " my uncle 's intentions , as expressed to-night , make it desirable that there should be an understanding between us .
Take a seat beside me " -- leading her to a sofa -- " and let us talk this matter over . "
With a gesture of repulsion Florence declined the proffered seat , and remained standing .
" As you please , " she answered , coldly .
" Will you be seated ? "
" No ; our interview will be brief . "
" Then I will come to the point .
Uncle John wishes to see us united . "
" It can never be ! " said Florence , decidedly .
Curtis bit his lip in mortification , for her tone was cold and scornful .
Mingled with this mortification was genuine regret , for , so far as he was capable of loving any one , he loved his fair young cousin .
" You profess to love Uncle John , and yet you would disappoint his cherished hope ! " he returned .
" Is it his cherished hope ? "
" There is no doubt about it .
He has spoken to me more than once on the subject .
Feeling that his end is near , he wishes to leave you in charge of a protector . "
CHAPTER I A RED-HAIRED GIRL The residence of Mr. Peter Pett , the well-known financier , on Riverside Drive is one of the leading eyesores of that breezy and expensive boulevard .
As you pass by in your limousine , or while enjoying ten cents worth of fresh air on top of a green omnibus , it jumps out and bites at you .
Architects , confronted with it , reel and throw up their hands defensively , and even the lay observer has a sense of shock .
The place resembles in almost equal proportions a cathedral , a suburban villa , a hotel and a Chinese pagoda .
Many of its windows are of stained glass , and above the porch stand two terra-cotta lions , considerably more repulsive even than the complacent animals which guard New York 's Public Library .
It is a house which is impossible to overlook : and it was probably for this reason that Mrs. Pett insisted on her husband buying it , for she was a woman who liked to be noticed .
Through the rich interior of this mansion Mr. Pett , its nominal proprietor , was wandering like a lost spirit .
The hour was about ten of a fine Sunday morning , but the Sabbath calm which was upon the house had not communicated itself to him .
There was a look of exasperation on his usually patient face , and a muttered oath , picked up no doubt on the godless Stock Exchange , escaped his lips .
" Darn it ! "
He was afflicted by a sense of the pathos of his position .
It was not as if he demanded much from life .
He asked but little here below .
At that moment all that he wanted was a quiet spot where he might read his Sunday paper in solitary peace , and he could not find one .
Intruders lurked behind every door .
The place was congested .
This sort of thing had been growing worse and worse ever since his marriage two years previously .
There was a strong literary virus in Mrs. Pett 's system .
She not only wrote voluminously herself -- the name Nesta Ford Pett is familiar to all lovers of sensational fiction -- but aimed at maintaining a salon .
Starting , in pursuance of this aim , with a single specimen , -- her nephew , Willie Partridge , who was working on a new explosive which would eventually revolutionise war -- she had gradually added to her collections , until now she gave shelter beneath her terra-cotta roof to no fewer than six young and unrecognised geniuses .
Six brilliant youths , mostly novelists who had not yet started and poets who were about to begin , cluttered up Mr. Pett 's rooms on this fair June morning , while he , clutching his Sunday paper , wandered about , finding , like the dove in Genesis , no rest .
It was at such times that he was almost inclined to envy his wife 's first husband , a business friend of his named Elmer Ford , who had perished suddenly of an apoplectic seizure : and the pity which he generally felt for the deceased tended to shift its focus .
Marriage had certainly complicated life for Mr. Pett , as it frequently does for the man who waits fifty years before trying it .
In addition to the geniuses , Mrs. Pett had brought with her to her new home her only son , Ogden , a fourteen-year-old boy of a singularly unloveable type .
Years of grown-up society and the absence of anything approaching discipline had given him a precocity on which the earnest efforts of a series of private tutors had expended themselves in vain .
They came , full of optimism and self-confidence , to retire after a brief interval , shattered by the boy 's stodgy resistance to education in any form or shape .
To Mr. Pett , never at his ease with boys , Ogden Ford was a constant irritant .
He disliked his stepson 's personality , and he more than suspected him of stealing his cigarettes .
It was an additional annoyance that he was fully aware of the impossibility of ever catching him at it .
Mr. Pett resumed his journey .
He had interrupted it for a moment to listen at the door of the morning-room , but , a remark in a high tenor voice about the essential Christianity of the poet Shelley filtering through the oak , he had moved on .
Silence from behind another door farther down the passage encouraged him to place his fingers on the handle , but a crashing chord from an unseen piano made him remove them swiftly .
He roamed on , and a few minutes later the process of elimination had brought him to what was technically his own private library -- a large , soothing room full of old books , of which his father had been a great collector .
Mr. Pett did not read old books himself , but he liked to be among them , and it is proof of his pessimism that he had not tried the library first .
To his depressed mind it had seemed hardly possible that there could be nobody there .
He stood outside the door , listening tensely .
He could hear nothing .
He went in , and for an instant experienced that ecstatic thrill which only comes to elderly gentlemen of solitary habit who in a house full of their juniors find themselves alone at last .
Then a voice spoke , shattering his dream of solitude .
" Hello , pop ! "
Ogden Ford was sprawling in a deep chair in the shadows .
" Come in , pop , come in .
Lots of room . "
Mr. Pett stood in the doorway , regarding his step-son with a sombre eye .
He resented the boy 's tone of easy patronage , all the harder to endure with philosophic calm at the present moment from the fact that the latter was lounging in his favourite chair .
Even from an aesthetic point of view the sight of the bulging child offended him .
Ogden Ford was round and blobby and looked overfed .
He had the plethoric habit of one to whom wholesome exercise is a stranger and the sallow complexion of the confirmed candy-fiend .
Even now , a bare half hour after breakfast , his jaws were moving with a rhythmical , champing motion .
" What are you eating , boy ? " demanded Mr. Pett , his disappointment turning to irritability .
" Candy . "
" I wish you would not eat candy all day . "
" Mother gave it to me , " said Ogden simply .
As he had anticipated , the shot silenced the enemy 's battery .
Mr. Pett grunted , but made no verbal comment .
Ogden celebrated his victory by putting another piece of candy in his mouth .
" Got a grouch this morning , have n't you , pop ? "
" I will not be spoken to like that ! "
" I thought you had , " said his step-son complacently .
" I can always tell .
I do n't see why you want to come picking on me , though .
I 've done nothing . "
Mr. Pett was sniffing suspiciously .
" You 've been smoking . "
" Me !! "
" Smoking cigarettes . "
" No , sir ! "
" There are two butts in the ash-tray . "
" I did n't put them there . "
" One of them is warm . "
" It 's a warm day . "
" You dropped it there when you heard me come in . "
" No , sir !
I 've only been here a few minutes .
I guess one of the fellows was in here before me .
They 're always swiping your coffin-nails .
You ought to do something about it , pop .
You ought to assert yourself . "
A sense of helplessness came upon Mr. Pett .
For the thousandth time he felt himself baffled by this calm , goggle-eyed boy who treated him with such supercilious coolness .
" You ought to be out in the open air this lovely morning , " he said feebly .
" All right .
Let 's go for a walk .
I will if you will . "
" I -- I have other things to do , " said Mr. Pett , recoiling from the prospect .
" Well , this fresh-air stuff is overrated anyway .
Where 's the sense of having a home if you do n't stop in it ? "
" When I was your age , I would have been out on a morning like this -- er -- bowling my hoop . "
" And look at you now ! "
" What do you mean ? "
" Martyr to lumbago . "
" I am not a martyr to lumbago , " said Mr. Pett , who was touchy on the subject .
" Have it your own way .
All I know is -- " " Never mind ! "
" I 'm only saying what mother . . . " " Be quiet ! "
Ogden made further researches in the candy box .
" Have some , pop ? "
" No . "
" Quite right .
Got to be careful at your age . "
" What do you mean ? "
" Getting on , you know .
Not so young as you used to be .
Come in , pop , if you 're coming in .
There 's a draft from that door . "
Mr. Pett retired , fermenting .
He wondered how another man would have handled this situation .
The ridiculous inconsistency of the human character infuriated him .
Why should he be a totally different man on Riverside Drive from the person he was in Pine Street ?
Why should he be able to hold his own in Pine Street with grown men -- whiskered , square-jawed financiers -- and yet be unable on Riverside Drive to eject a fourteen-year-old boy from an easy chair ?
It seemed to him sometimes that a curious paralysis of the will came over him out of business hours .
Meanwhile , he had still to find a place where he could read his Sunday paper .
He stood for a while in thought .
Then his brow cleared , and he began to mount the stairs .
Reaching the top floor , he walked along the passage and knocked on a door at the end of it .
From behind this door , as from behind those below , sounds proceeded , but this time they did not seem to discourage Mr. Pett .
It was the tapping of a typewriter that he heard , and he listened to it with an air of benevolent approval .
He loved to hear the sound of a typewriter : it made home so like the office .
" Come in , " called a girl 's voice .
The room in which Mr. Pett found himself was small but cosy , and its cosiness -- oddly , considering the sex of its owner -- had that peculiar quality which belongs as a rule to the dens of men .
A large bookcase almost covered one side of it , its reds and blues and browns smiling cheerfully at whoever entered .
The walls were hung with prints , judiciously chosen and arranged .
Through a window to the left , healthfully open at the bottom , the sun streamed in , bringing with it the pleasantly subdued whirring of automobiles out on the Drive .
At a desk at right angles to this window , her vivid red-gold hair rippling in the breeze from the river , sat the girl who had been working at the typewriter .
She turned as Mr. Pett entered , and smiled over her shoulder .
CHAPTER I When I was a small boy at the beginning of the century I remember an old man who wore knee-breeches and worsted stockings , and who used to hobble about the street of our village with the help of a stick .
He must have been getting on for eighty in the year 1807 , earlier than which date I suppose I can hardly remember him , for I was born in 1802 .
A few white locks hung about his ears , his shoulders were bent and his knees feeble , but he was still hale , and was much respected in our little world of Paleham .
His name was Pontifex .
His wife was said to be his master ; I have been told she brought him a little money , but it can not have been much .
She was a tall , square-shouldered person ( I have heard my father call her a Gothic woman ) who had insisted on being married to Mr Pontifex when he was young and too good-natured to say nay to any woman who wooed him .
The pair had lived not unhappily together , for Mr Pontifex 's temper was easy and he soon learned to bow before his wife 's more stormy moods .
Mr Pontifex was a carpenter by trade ; he was also at one time parish clerk ; when I remember him , however , he had so far risen in life as to be no longer compelled to work with his own hands .
In his earlier days he had taught himself to draw .
I do not say he drew well , but it was surprising he should draw as well as he did .
My father , who took the living of Paleham about the year 1797 , became possessed of a good many of old Mr Pontifex 's drawings , which were always of local subjects , and so unaffectedly painstaking that they might have passed for the work of some good early master .
I remember them as hanging up framed and glazed in the study at the Rectory , and tinted , as all else in the room was tinted , with the green reflected from the fringe of ivy leaves that grew around the windows .
I wonder how they will actually cease and come to an end as drawings , and into what new phases of being they will then enter .
Not content with being an artist , Mr Pontifex must needs also be a musician .
He built the organ in the church with his own hands , and made a smaller one which he kept in his own house .
He could play as much as he could draw , not very well according to professional standards , but much better than could have been expected .
I myself showed a taste for music at an early age , and old Mr Pontifex on finding it out , as he soon did , became partial to me in consequence .
It may be thought that with so many irons in the fire he could hardly be a very thriving man , but this was not the case .
His father had been a day labourer , and he had himself begun life with no other capital than his good sense and good constitution ; now , however , there was a goodly show of timber about his yard , and a look of solid comfort over his whole establishment .
Towards the close of the eighteenth century and not long before my father came to Paleham , he had taken a farm of about ninety acres , thus making a considerable rise in life .
Along with the farm there went an old-fashioned but comfortable house with a charming garden and an orchard .
The carpenter 's business was now carried on in one of the outhouses that had once been part of some conventual buildings , the remains of which could be seen in what was called the Abbey Close .
The house itself , embosomed in honeysuckles and creeping roses , was an ornament to the whole village , nor were its internal arrangements less exemplary than its outside was ornamental .
Report said that Mrs Pontifex starched the sheets for her best bed , and I can well believe it .
How well do I remember her parlour half filled with the organ which her husband had built , and scented with a withered apple or two from the _ pyrus japonica _ that grew outside the house ; the picture of the prize ox over the chimney-piece , which Mr Pontifex himself had painted ; the transparency of the man coming to show light to a coach upon a snowy night , also by Mr Pontifex ; the little old man and little old woman who told the weather ; the china shepherd and shepherdess ; the jars of feathery flowering grasses with a peacock 's feather or two among them to set them off , and the china bowls full of dead rose leaves dried with bay salt .
All has long since vanished and become a memory , faded but still fragrant to myself .
Nay , but her kitchen -- and the glimpses into a cavernous cellar beyond it , wherefrom came gleams from the pale surfaces of milk cans , or it may be of the arms and face of a milkmaid skimming the cream ; or again her storeroom , where among other treasures she kept the famous lipsalve which was one of her especial glories , and of which she would present a shape yearly to those whom she delighted to honour .
She wrote out the recipe for this and gave it to my mother a year or two before she died , but we could never make it as she did .
When we were children she used sometimes to send her respects to my mother , and ask leave for us to come and take tea with her .
Right well she used to ply us .
As for her temper , we never met such a delightful old lady in our lives ; whatever Mr Pontifex may have had to put up with , we had no cause for complaint , and then Mr Pontifex would play to us upon the organ , and we would stand round him open-mouthed and think him the most wonderfully clever man that ever was born , except of course our papa .
Mrs Pontifex had no sense of humour , at least I can call to mind no signs of this , but her husband had plenty of fun in him , though few would have guessed it from his appearance .
I remember my father once sent me down to his workship to get some glue , and I happened to come when old Pontifex was in the act of scolding his boy .
He had got the lad -- a pudding-headed fellow -- by the ear and was saying , " What ?
Lost again -- smothered o ' wit . "
( I believe it was the boy who was himself supposed to be a wandering soul , and who was thus addressed as lost . )
" Now , look here , my lad , " he continued , " some boys are born stupid , and thou art one of them ; some achieve stupidity -- that 's thee again , Jim -- thou wast both born stupid and hast greatly increased thy birthright -- and some " ( and here came a climax during which the boy 's head and ear were swayed from side to side ) " have stupidity thrust upon them , which , if it please the Lord , shall not be thy case , my lad , for I will thrust stupidity from thee , though I have to box thine ears in doing so , " but I did not see that the old man really did box Jim 's ears , or do more than pretend to frighten him , for the two understood one another perfectly well .
Another time I remember hearing him call the village rat-catcher by saying , " Come hither , thou three-days-and-three-nights , thou , " alluding , as I afterwards learned , to the rat-catcher 's periods of intoxication ; but I will tell no more of such trifles .
My father 's face would always brighten when old Pontifex 's name was mentioned .
" I tell you , Edward , " he would say to me , " old Pontifex was not only an able man , but he was one of the very ablest men that ever I knew . "
This was more than I as a young man was prepared to stand .
" My dear father , " I answered , " what did he do ?
He could draw a little , but could he to save his life have got a picture into the Royal Academy exhibition ?
He built two organs and could play the Minuet in _ Samson _ on one and the March in _ Scipio _ on the other ; he was a good carpenter and a bit of a wag ; he was a good old fellow enough , but why make him out so much abler than he was ? "
" My boy , " returned my father , " you must not judge by the work , but by the work in connection with the surroundings .
Could Giotto or Filippo Lippi , think you , have got a picture into the Exhibition ?
Would a single one of those frescoes we went to see when we were at Padua have the remotest chance of being hung , if it were sent in for exhibition now ?
Why , the Academy people would be so outraged that they would not even write to poor Giotto to tell him to come and take his fresco away .
Phew ! "
continued he , waxing warm , " if old Pontifex had had Cromwell 's chances he would have done all that Cromwell did , and have done it better ; if he had had Giotto 's chances he would have done all that Giotto did , and done it no worse ; as it was , he was a village carpenter , and I will undertake to say he never scamped a job in the whole course of his life . "
" But , " said I , " we can not judge people with so many ' ifs . '
If old Pontifex had lived in Giotto 's time he might have been another Giotto , but he did not live in Giotto 's time . "
" I tell you , Edward , " said my father with some severity , " we must judge men not so much by what they do , as by what they make us feel that they have it in them to do .
If a man has done enough either in painting , music or the affairs of life , to make me feel that I might trust him in an emergency he has done enough .
It is not by what a man has actually put upon his canvas , nor yet by the acts which he has set down , so to speak , upon the canvas of his life that I will judge him , but by what he makes me feel that he felt and aimed at .
If he has made me feel that he felt those things to be loveable which I hold loveable myself I ask no more ; his grammar may have been imperfect , but still I have understood him ; he and I are _ en rapport _ ; and I say again , Edward , that old Pontifex was not only an able man , but one of the very ablest men I ever knew . "
PART I At the little town of Vevey , in Switzerland , there is a particularly comfortable hotel .
There are , indeed , many hotels , for the entertainment of tourists is the business of the place , which , as many travelers will remember , is seated upon the edge of a remarkably blue lake -- a lake that it behooves every tourist to visit .
The shore of the lake presents an unbroken array of establishments of this order , of every category , from the “ grand hotel ” of the newest fashion , with a chalk-white front , a hundred balconies , and a dozen flags flying from its roof , to the little Swiss pension of an elder day , with its name inscribed in German-looking lettering upon a pink or yellow wall and an awkward summerhouse in the angle of the garden .
One of the hotels at Vevey , however , is famous , even classical , being distinguished from many of its upstart neighbors by an air both of luxury and of maturity .
In this region , in the month of June , American travelers are extremely numerous ; it may be said , indeed , that Vevey assumes at this period some of the characteristics of an American watering place .
There are sights and sounds which evoke a vision , an echo , of Newport and Saratoga .
There is a flitting hither and thither of “ stylish ” young girls , a rustling of muslin flounces , a rattle of dance music in the morning hours , a sound of high-pitched voices at all times .
You receive an impression of these things at the excellent inn of the “ Trois Couronnes ” and are transported in fancy to the Ocean House or to Congress Hall .
But at the “ Trois Couronnes , ” it must be added , there are other features that are much at variance with these suggestions : neat German waiters , who look like secretaries of legation ; Russian princesses sitting in the garden ; little Polish boys walking about held by the hand , with their governors ; a view of the sunny crest of the Dent du Midi and the picturesque towers of the Castle of Chillon .
I hardly know whether it was the analogies or the differences that were uppermost in the mind of a young American , who , two or three years ago , sat in the garden of the “ Trois Couronnes , ” looking about him , rather idly , at some of the graceful objects I have mentioned .
It was a beautiful summer morning , and in whatever fashion the young American looked at things , they must have seemed to him charming .
He had come from Geneva the day before by the little steamer , to see his aunt , who was staying at the hotel -- Geneva having been for a long time his place of residence .
But his aunt had a headache -- his aunt had almost always a headache -- and now she was shut up in her room , smelling camphor , so that he was at liberty to wander about .
He was some seven-and-twenty years of age ; when his friends spoke of him , they usually said that he was at Geneva “ studying . ”
When his enemies spoke of him , they said -- but , after all , he had no enemies ; he was an extremely amiable fellow , and universally liked .
What I should say is , simply , that when certain persons spoke of him they affirmed that the reason of his spending so much time at Geneva was that he was extremely devoted to a lady who lived there -- a foreign lady -- a person older than himself .
Very few Americans -- indeed , I think none -- had ever seen this lady , about whom there were some singular stories .
But Winterbourne had an old attachment for the little metropolis of Calvinism ; he had been put to school there as a boy , and he had afterward gone to college there -- circumstances which had led to his forming a great many youthful friendships .
Many of these he had kept , and they were a source of great satisfaction to him .
After knocking at his aunt ’s door and learning that she was indisposed , he had taken a walk about the town , and then he had come in to his breakfast .
He had now finished his breakfast ; but he was drinking a small cup of coffee , which had been served to him on a little table in the garden by one of the waiters who looked like an attache .
At last he finished his coffee and lit a cigarette .
Presently a small boy came walking along the path -- an urchin of nine or ten .
The child , who was diminutive for his years , had an aged expression of countenance , a pale complexion , and sharp little features .
He was dressed in knickerbockers , with red stockings , which displayed his poor little spindle-shanks ; he also wore a brilliant red cravat .
He carried in his hand a long alpenstock , the sharp point of which he thrust into everything that he approached -- the flowerbeds , the garden benches , the trains of the ladies ’ dresses .
In front of Winterbourne he paused , looking at him with a pair of bright , penetrating little eyes .
“ Will you give me a lump of sugar ? ”
he asked in a sharp , hard little voice -- a voice immature and yet , somehow , not young .
Winterbourne glanced at the small table near him , on which his coffee service rested , and saw that several morsels of sugar remained .
“ Yes , you may take one , ” he answered ; “ but I do n’t think sugar is good for little boys . ”
This little boy stepped forward and carefully selected three of the coveted fragments , two of which he buried in the pocket of his knickerbockers , depositing the other as promptly in another place .
He poked his alpenstock , lance-fashion , into Winterbourne ’s bench and tried to crack the lump of sugar with his teeth .
“ Oh , blazes ; it ’s har-r-d ! ”
he exclaimed , pronouncing the adjective in a peculiar manner .
Winterbourne had immediately perceived that he might have the honor of claiming him as a fellow countryman .
“ Take care you do n’t hurt your teeth , ” he said , paternally .
“ I have n’t got any teeth to hurt .
They have all come out .
I have only got seven teeth .
My mother counted them last night , and one came out right afterward .
She said she ’d slap me if any more came out .
I ca n’t help it .
It ’s this old Europe .
It ’s the climate that makes them come out .
In America they did n’t come out .
It ’s these hotels . ”
Winterbourne was much amused .
“ If you eat three lumps of sugar , your mother will certainly slap you , ” he said .
“ She ’s got to give me some candy , then , ” rejoined his young interlocutor .
“ I ca n’t get any candy here -- any American candy .
American candy ’s the best candy . ”
“ And are American little boys the best little boys ? ”
asked Winterbourne .
“ I do n’t know .
I ’m an American boy , ” said the child .
“ I see you are one of the best ! ”
laughed Winterbourne .
“ Are you an American man ? ”
pursued this vivacious infant .
And then , on Winterbourne ’s affirmative reply -- “ American men are the best , ” he declared .
His companion thanked him for the compliment , and the child , who had now got astride of his alpenstock , stood looking about him , while he attacked a second lump of sugar .
Winterbourne wondered if he himself had been like this in his infancy , for he had been brought to Europe at about this age .
“ Here comes my sister ! ”
cried the child in a moment .
“ She ’s an American girl . ”
Winterbourne looked along the path and saw a beautiful young lady advancing .
“ American girls are the best girls , ” he said cheerfully to his young companion .
“ My sister ai n’t the best ! ”
the child declared .
“ She ’s always blowing at me . ”
“ I imagine that is your fault , not hers , ” said Winterbourne .
The young lady meanwhile had drawn near .
She was dressed in white muslin , with a hundred frills and flounces , and knots of pale-colored ribbon .
She was bareheaded , but she balanced in her hand a large parasol , with a deep border of embroidery ; and she was strikingly , admirably pretty .
“ How pretty they are ! ”
thought Winterbourne , straightening himself in his seat , as if he were prepared to rise .
The young lady paused in front of his bench , near the parapet of the garden , which overlooked the lake .
The little boy had now converted his alpenstock into a vaulting pole , by the aid of which he was springing about in the gravel and kicking it up not a little .
“ Randolph , ” said the young lady , “ what ARE you doing ? ”
“ I ’m going up the Alps , ” replied Randolph .
“ This is the way ! ”
And he gave another little jump , scattering the pebbles about Winterbourne ’s ears .
“ That ’s the way they come down , ” said Winterbourne .
“ He ’s an American man ! ”
cried Randolph , in his little hard voice .
The young lady gave no heed to this announcement , but looked straight at her brother .
“ Well , I guess you had better be quiet , ” she simply observed .
It seemed to Winterbourne that he had been in a manner presented .
He got up and stepped slowly toward the young girl , throwing away his cigarette .
“ This little boy and I have made acquaintance , ” he said , with great civility .
In Geneva , as he had been perfectly aware , a young man was not at liberty to speak to a young unmarried lady except under certain rarely occurring conditions ; but here at Vevey , what conditions could be better than these ?
-- a pretty American girl coming and standing in front of you in a garden .
This pretty American girl , however , on hearing Winterbourne ’s observation , simply glanced at him ; she then turned her head and looked over the parapet , at the lake and the opposite mountains .
He wondered whether he had gone too far , but he decided that he must advance farther , rather than retreat .
While he was thinking of something else to say , the young lady turned to the little boy again .
“ I should like to know where you got that pole , ” she said .
“ I bought it , ” responded Randolph .
“ You do n’t mean to say you ’re going to take it to Italy ? ”
CHAPTER I THE SLAVE 'S SOCIAL CIRCLE .
With the growing population in the Southern States , the increase of mulattoes has been very great .
Society does not frown upon the man who sits with his half-white child upon his knee whilst the mother stands , a slave , behind his chair .
In nearly all the cities and towns of the Slave States , the real negro , or clear black , does not amount to more than one in four of the slave population .
This fact is of itself the best evidence of the degraded and immoral condition of the relation of master and slave .
Throughout the Southern States , there is a class of slaves who , in most of the towns , are permitted to hire their time from their owners , and who are always expected to pay a high price .
This class is the mulatto women , distinguished for their fascinating beauty .
The handsomest of these usually pay the greatest amount for their time .
Many of these women are the favorites of men of property and standing , who furnish them with the means of compensating their owners , and not a few are dressed in the most extravagant manner .
When we take into consideration the fact that no safeguard is thrown around virtue , and no inducement held out to slave-women to be pure and chaste , we will not be surprised when told that immorality and vice pervade the cities and towns of the South to an extent unknown in the Northern States .
Indeed , many of the slave-women have no higher aspiration than that of becoming the finely-dressed mistress of some white man .
At negro balls and parties , this class of women usually make the most splendid appearance , and are eagerly sought after in the dance , or to entertain in the drawing-room or at the table .
A few years ago , among the many slave-women in Richmond , Virginia , who hired their time of their masters , was Agnes , a mulatto owned by John Graves , Esq. , and who might be heard boasting that she was the daughter of an American Senator .
Although nearly forty years of age at the time of which we write , Agnes was still exceedingly handsome .
More than half white , with long black hair and deep blue eyes , no one felt like disputing with her when she urged her claim to her relationship with the Anglo-Saxon .
In her younger days , Agnes had been a housekeeper for a young slaveholder , and in sustaining this relation had become the mother of two daughters .
After being cast aside by this young man , the slave-woman betook herself to the business of a laundress , and was considered to be the most tasteful woman in Richmond at her vocation .
Isabella and Marion , the two daughters of Agnes , resided with their mother , and gave her what aid they could in her business .
The mother , however , was very choice of her daughters , and would allow them to perform no labor that would militate against their lady-like appearance .
Agnes early resolved to bring up her daughters as ladies , as she termed it .
As the girls grew older , the mother had to pay a stipulated price for them per month .
Her notoriety as a laundress of the first class enabled her to put an extra charge upon the linen that passed through her hands ; and although she imposed little or no work upon her daughters , she was enabled to live in comparative luxury and have her daughters dressed to attract attention , especially at the negro balls and parties .
Although the term " negro ball " is applied to these gatherings , yet a large portion of the men who attend them are whites .
Negro balls and parties in the Southern States , especially in the cities and towns , are usually made up of quadroon women , a few negro men , and any number of white gentlemen .
These are gatherings of the most democratic character .
Bankers , merchants , lawyers , doctors , and their clerks and students , all take part in these social assemblies upon terms of perfect equality .
The father and son not unfrequently meet and dance alike at a negro ball .
It was at one of these parties that Henry Linwood , the son of a wealthy and retired gentleman of Richmond , was first introduced to Isabella , the oldest daughter of Agnes .
The young man had just returned from Harvard College , where he had spent the previous five years .
Isabella was in her eighteenth year , and was admitted by all who knew her to be the handsomest girl , colored or white , in the city .
On this occasion , she was attired in a sky-blue silk dress , with deep black lace flounces , and bertha of the same .
On her well-moulded arms she wore massive gold bracelets , while her rich black hair was arranged at the back in broad basket plaits , ornamented with pearls , and the front in the French style ( a la Imperatrice ) , which suited her classic face to perfection .
Marion was scarcely less richly dressed than her sister .
Henry Linwood paid great attention to Isabella which was looked upon with gratification by her mother , and became a matter of general conversation with all present .
Of course , the young man escorted the beautiful quadroon home that evening , and became the favorite visitor at the house of Agnes .
It was on a beautiful moonlight night in the month of August when all who reside in tropical climates are eagerly grasping for a breath of fresh air , that Henry Linwood was in the garden which surrounded Agnes ' cottage , with the young quadroon by his side .
He drew from his pocket a newspaper wet from the press , and read the following advertisement : -- NOTICE .
-- Seventy-nine negroes will be offered for sale on Monday , September 10 , at 12 o'clock , being the entire stock of the late John Graves in an excellent condition , and all warranted against the common vices .
Among them are several mechanics , able-bodied field-hands , plough-boys , and women with children , some of them very prolific , affording a rare opportunity for any one who wishes to raise a strong and healthy lot of servants for their own use .
Also several mulatto girls of rare personal qualities , -- two of these very superior .
Among the above slaves advertised for sale were Agnes and her two daughters .
Ere young Linwood left the quadroon that evening , he promised her that he would become her purchaser , and make her free and her own mistress .
Mr. Graves had long been considered not only an excellent and upright citizen of the first standing among the whites , but even the slaves regarded him as one of the kindest of masters .
Having inherited his slaves with the rest of his property , he became possessed of them without any consultation or wish of his own .
He would neither buy nor sell slaves , and was exceedingly careful , in letting them out , that they did not find oppressive and tyrannical masters .
No slave speculator ever dared to cross the threshold of this planter of the Old Dominion .
He was a constant attendant upon religious worship , and was noted for his general benevolence .
The American Bible Society , the American Tract Society , and the cause of Foreign Missions , found in him a liberal friend .
He was always anxious that his slaves should appear well on the Sabbath , and have an opportunity of hearing the word of God .
CHAPTER II THE NEGRO SALE .
As might have been expected , the day of sale brought an usually large number together to compete for the property to be sold .
Farmers , who make a business of raising slaves for the market , were there , and slave-traders , who make a business of buying human beings in the slave-raising States and taking them to the far South , were also in attendance .
Men and women , too , who wished to purchase for their own use , had found their way to the slave sale .
In the midst of the throne was one who felt a deeper interest in the result of the sale than any other of the bystanders .
This was young Linwood .
True to his promise , he was there with a blank bank-check in his pocket , awaiting with impatience to enter the list as a bidder for the beautiful slave .
It was indeed a heart-rending scene to witness the lamentations of these slaves , all of whom had grown up together on the old homestead of Mr. Graves , and who had been treated with great kindness by that gentleman , during his life .
Now they were to be separated , and form new relations and companions .
Such is the precarious condition of the slave .
Even when with a good master , there is no certainty of his happiness in the future .
The less valuable slaves were first placed upon the auction-block , one after another , and sold to the highest bidder .
Husbands and wives were separated with a degree of indifference that is unknown in any other relation in life .
Brothers and sisters were tom from each other , and mothers saw their children for the last time on earth .
It was late in the day , and when the greatest number of persons were thought to be present , when Agnes and her daughters were brought out to the place of sale .
The mother was first put upon the auction-block , and sold to a noted negro trader named Jennings .
Marion was next ordered to ascend the stand , which she did with a trembling step , and was sold for $ 1200 .
All eyes were now turned on Isabella , as she was led forward by the auctioneer .
The appearance of the handsome quadroon caused a deep sensation among the crowd .
There she stood , with a skin as fair as most white women , her features as beautifully regular as any of her sex of pure Anglo-Saxon blood , her long black hair done up in the neatest manner , her form tall and graceful , and her whole appearance indicating one superior to her condition .
The auctioneer commenced by saying that Miss Isabella was fit to deck the drawing-room of the finest mansion in Virginia .
" How much , gentlemen , for this real Albino !
-- fit fancy-girl for any one !
She enjoys good health , and has a sweet temper .
How much do you say ? "
" Five hundred dollars . "
" Only five hundred for such a girl as this ?
Gentlemen , she is worth a deal more than that sum .
You certainly do not know the value of the article you are bidding on .
Here , gentlemen , I hold in my hand a paper certifying that she has a good moral character . "
" Seven hundred . "
" Ah , gentlemen , that is something like .
This paper also states that she is very intelligent . "
" Eight hundred . "
" She was first sprinkled , then immersed , and is now warranted to be a devoted Christian , and perfectly trustworthy . "
THE TURN OF THE SCREW The story had held us , round the fire , sufficiently breathless , but except the obvious remark that it was gruesome , as , on Christmas Eve in an old house , a strange tale should essentially be , I remember no comment uttered till somebody happened to say that it was the only case he had met in which such a visitation had fallen on a child .
The case , I may mention , was that of an apparition in just such an old house as had gathered us for the occasion -- an appearance , of a dreadful kind , to a little boy sleeping in the room with his mother and waking her up in the terror of it ; waking her not to dissipate his dread and soothe him to sleep again , but to encounter also , herself , before she had succeeded in doing so , the same sight that had shaken him .
It was this observation that drew from Douglas -- not immediately , but later in the evening -- a reply that had the interesting consequence to which I call attention .
Someone else told a story not particularly effective , which I saw he was not following .
This I took for a sign that he had himself something to produce and that we should only have to wait .
We waited in fact till two nights later ; but that same evening , before we scattered , he brought out what was in his mind .
“ I quite agree -- in regard to Griffin ’s ghost , or whatever it was -- that its appearing first to the little boy , at so tender an age , adds a particular touch .
But it ’s not the first occurrence of its charming kind that I know to have involved a child .
If the child gives the effect another turn of the screw , what do you say to TWO children -- ? ”
“ We say , of course , ” somebody exclaimed , “ that they give two turns !
Also that we want to hear about them . ”
I can see Douglas there before the fire , to which he had got up to present his back , looking down at his interlocutor with his hands in his pockets .
“ Nobody but me , till now , has ever heard .
It ’s quite too horrible . ”
This , naturally , was declared by several voices to give the thing the utmost price , and our friend , with quiet art , prepared his triumph by turning his eyes over the rest of us and going on : “ It ’s beyond everything .
Nothing at all that I know touches it . ”
“ For sheer terror ? ”
I remember asking .
He seemed to say it was not so simple as that ; to be really at a loss how to qualify it .
He passed his hand over his eyes , made a little wincing grimace .
“ For dreadful -- dreadfulness ! ”
“ Oh , how delicious ! ”
cried one of the women .
He took no notice of her ; he looked at me , but as if , instead of me , he saw what he spoke of .
“ For general uncanny ugliness and horror and pain . ”
“ Well then , ” I said , “ just sit right down and begin . ”
He turned round to the fire , gave a kick to a log , watched it an instant .
Then as he faced us again : “ I ca n’t begin .
I shall have to send to town . ”
There was a unanimous groan at this , and much reproach ; after which , in his preoccupied way , he explained .
“ The story ’s written .
It ’s in a locked drawer -- it has not been out for years .
I could write to my man and enclose the key ; he could send down the packet as he finds it . ”
It was to me in particular that he appeared to propound this -- appeared almost to appeal for aid not to hesitate .
He had broken a thickness of ice , the formation of many a winter ; had had his reasons for a long silence .
The others resented postponement , but it was just his scruples that charmed me .
I adjured him to write by the first post and to agree with us for an early hearing ; then I asked him if the experience in question had been his own .
To this his answer was prompt .
“ Oh , thank God , no ! ”
“ And is the record yours ?
You took the thing down ? ”
“ Nothing but the impression .
I took that HERE ” -- he tapped his heart .
“ I ’ve never lost it . ”
“ Then your manuscript -- ? ”
“ Is in old , faded ink , and in the most beautiful hand . ”
He hung fire again .
“ A woman ’s .
She has been dead these twenty years .
She sent me the pages in question before she died . ”
They were all listening now , and of course there was somebody to be arch , or at any rate to draw the inference .
But if he put the inference by without a smile it was also without irritation .
“ She was a most charming person , but she was ten years older than I .
She was my sister ’s governess , ” he quietly said .
“ She was the most agreeable woman I ’ve ever known in her position ; she would have been worthy of any whatever .
It was long ago , and this episode was long before .
I was at Trinity , and I found her at home on my coming down the second summer .
I was much there that year -- it was a beautiful one ; and we had , in her off-hours , some strolls and talks in the garden -- talks in which she struck me as awfully clever and nice .
Oh yes ; do n’t grin : I liked her extremely and am glad to this day to think she liked me , too .
If she had n’t she would n’t have told me .
She had never told anyone .
It was n’t simply that she said so , but that I knew she had n’t .
I was sure ; I could see .
You ’ll easily judge why when you hear . ”
“ Because the thing had been such a scare ? ”
He continued to fix me .
“ You ’ll easily judge , ” he repeated : “ YOU will . ”
I fixed him , too .
“ I see .
She was in love . ”
He laughed for the first time .
“ You ARE acute .
Yes , she was in love .
That is , she had been .
That came out -- she could n’t tell her story without its coming out .
I saw it , and she saw I saw it ; but neither of us spoke of it .
I remember the time and the place -- the corner of the lawn , the shade of the great beeches and the long , hot summer afternoon .
It was n’t a scene for a shudder ; but oh -- ! ”
He quitted the fire and dropped back into his chair .
“ You ’ll receive the packet Thursday morning ? ”
I inquired .
“ Probably not till the second post . ”
“ Well then ; after dinner -- ” “ You ’ll all meet me here ? ”
He looked us round again .
“ Is n’t anybody going ? ”
It was almost the tone of hope .
“ Everybody will stay ! ”
“ _ I _ will ” -- and “ _ I _ will ! ”
cried the ladies whose departure had been fixed .
Mrs. Griffin , however , expressed the need for a little more light .
“ Who was it she was in love with ? ”
“ The story will tell , ” I took upon myself to reply .
“ Oh , I ca n’t wait for the story ! ”
“ The story WO N’T tell , ” said Douglas ; “ not in any literal , vulgar way . ”
“ More ’s the pity , then .
That ’s the only way I ever understand . ”
“ Wo n’t YOU tell , Douglas ? ”
somebody else inquired .
He sprang to his feet again .
“ Yes -- tomorrow .
Now I must go to bed .
Good night . ”
And quickly catching up a candlestick , he left us slightly bewildered .
From our end of the great brown hall we heard his step on the stair ; whereupon Mrs. Griffin spoke .
“ Well , if I do n’t know who she was in love with , I know who HE was . ”
“ She was ten years older , ” said her husband .
“ Raison de plus -- at that age !
But it ’s rather nice , his long reticence . ”
“ Forty years ! ”
Griffin put in .
“ With this outbreak at last . ”
“ The outbreak , ” I returned , “ will make a tremendous occasion of Thursday night ; ” and everyone so agreed with me that , in the light of it , we lost all attention for everything else .
The last story , however incomplete and like the mere opening of a serial , had been told ; we handshook and “ candlestuck , ” as somebody said , and went to bed .
I knew the next day that a letter containing the key had , by the first post , gone off to his London apartments ; but in spite of -- or perhaps just on account of -- the eventual diffusion of this knowledge we quite let him alone till after dinner , till such an hour of the evening , in fact , as might best accord with the kind of emotion on which our hopes were fixed .
Then he became as communicative as we could desire and indeed gave us his best reason for being so .
We had it from him again before the fire in the hall , as we had had our mild wonders of the previous night .
It appeared that the narrative he had promised to read us really required for a proper intelligence a few words of prologue .
Let me say here distinctly , to have done with it , that this narrative , from an exact transcript of my own made much later , is what I shall presently give .
Poor Douglas , before his death -- when it was in sight -- committed to me the manuscript that reached him on the third of these days and that , on the same spot , with immense effect , he began to read to our hushed little circle on the night of the fourth .
The departing ladies who had said they would stay did n’t , of course , thank heaven , stay : they departed , in consequence of arrangements made , in a rage of curiosity , as they professed , produced by the touches with which he had already worked us up .
But that only made his little final auditory more compact and select , kept it , round the hearth , subject to a common thrill .
Chapter I. Into the Primitive “ Old longings nomadic leap , Chafing at custom 's chain ; Again from its brumal sleep Wakens the ferine strain . ”
Buck did not read the newspapers , or he would have known that trouble was brewing , not alone for himself , but for every tide-water dog , strong of muscle and with warm , long hair , from Puget Sound to San Diego .
Because men , groping in the Arctic darkness , had found a yellow metal , and because steamship and transportation companies were booming the find , thousands of men were rushing into the Northland .
These men wanted dogs , and the dogs they wanted were heavy dogs , with strong muscles by which to toil , and furry coats to protect them from the frost .
Buck lived at a big house in the sun-kissed Santa Clara Valley .
Judge Miller 's place , it was called .
It stood back from the road , half hidden among the trees , through which glimpses could be caught of the wide cool veranda that ran around its four sides .
The house was approached by gravelled driveways which wound about through wide-spreading lawns and under the interlacing boughs of tall poplars .
At the rear things were on even a more spacious scale than at the front .
There were great stables , where a dozen grooms and boys held forth , rows of vine-clad servants ' cottages , an endless and orderly array of outhouses , long grape arbors , green pastures , orchards , and berry patches .
Then there was the pumping plant for the artesian well , and the big cement tank where Judge Miller 's boys took their morning plunge and kept cool in the hot afternoon .
And over this great demesne Buck ruled .
Here he was born , and here he had lived the four years of his life .
It was true , there were other dogs , There could not but be other dogs on so vast a place , but they did not count .
They came and went , resided in the populous kennels , or lived obscurely in the recesses of the house after the fashion of Toots , the Japanese pug , or Ysabel , the Mexican hairless , -- strange creatures that rarely put nose out of doors or set foot to ground .
On the other hand , there were the fox terriers , a score of them at least , who yelped fearful promises at Toots and Ysabel looking out of the windows at them and protected by a legion of housemaids armed with brooms and mops .
But Buck was neither house-dog nor kennel-dog .
The whole realm was his .
He plunged into the swimming tank or went hunting with the Judge 's sons ; he escorted Mollie and Alice , the Judge 's daughters , on long twilight or early morning rambles ; on wintry nights he lay at the Judge 's feet before the roaring library fire ; he carried the Judge 's grandsons on his back , or rolled them in the grass , and guarded their footsteps through wild adventures down to the fountain in the stable yard , and even beyond , where the paddocks were , and the berry patches .
Among the terriers he stalked imperiously , and Toots and Ysabel he utterly ignored , for he was king , -- king over all creeping , crawling , flying things of Judge Miller 's place , humans included .
His father , Elmo , a huge St. Bernard , had been the Judge 's inseparable companion , and Buck bid fair to follow in the way of his father .
He was not so large , -- he weighed only one hundred and forty pounds , -- for his mother , Shep , had been a Scotch shepherd dog .
Nevertheless , one hundred and forty pounds , to which was added the dignity that comes of good living and universal respect , enabled him to carry himself in right royal fashion .
During the four years since his puppyhood he had lived the life of a sated aristocrat ; he had a fine pride in himself , was even a trifle egotistical , as country gentlemen sometimes become because of their insular situation .
But he had saved himself by not becoming a mere pampered house-dog .
Hunting and kindred outdoor delights had kept down the fat and hardened his muscles ; and to him , as to the cold-tubbing races , the love of water had been a tonic and a health preserver .
And this was the manner of dog Buck was in the fall of 1897 , when the Klondike strike dragged men from all the world into the frozen North .
But Buck did not read the newspapers , and he did not know that Manuel , one of the gardener 's helpers , was an undesirable acquaintance .
Manuel had one besetting sin .
He loved to play Chinese lottery .
Also , in his gambling , he had one besetting weakness -- faith in a system ; and this made his damnation certain .
For to play a system requires money , while the wages of a gardener 's helper do not lap over the needs of a wife and numerous progeny .
The Judge was at a meeting of the Raisin Growers ' Association , and the boys were busy organizing an athletic club , on the memorable night of Manuel 's treachery .
No one saw him and Buck go off through the orchard on what Buck imagined was merely a stroll .
And with the exception of a solitary man , no one saw them arrive at the little flag station known as College Park .
This man talked with Manuel , and money chinked between them .
“ You might wrap up the goods before you deliver 'm , ” the stranger said gruffly , and Manuel doubled a piece of stout rope around Buck 's neck under the collar .
“ Twist it , an ' you 'll choke 'm plentee , ” said Manuel , and the stranger grunted a ready affirmative .
Buck had accepted the rope with quiet dignity .
To be sure , it was an unwonted performance : but he had learned to trust in men he knew , and to give them credit for a wisdom that outreached his own .
But when the ends of the rope were placed in the stranger 's hands , he growled menacingly .
He had merely intimated his displeasure , in his pride believing that to intimate was to command .
But to his surprise the rope tightened around his neck , shutting off his breath .
In quick rage he sprang at the man , who met him halfway , grappled him close by the throat , and with a deft twist threw him over on his back .
Then the rope tightened mercilessly , while Buck struggled in a fury , his tongue lolling out of his mouth and his great chest panting futilely .
Never in all his life had he been so vilely treated , and never in all his life had he been so angry .
But his strength ebbed , his eyes glazed , and he knew nothing when the train was flagged and the two men threw him into the baggage car .
The next he knew , he was dimly aware that his tongue was hurting and that he was being jolted along in some kind of a conveyance .
The hoarse shriek of a locomotive whistling a crossing told him where he was .
He had travelled too often with the Judge not to know the sensation of riding in a baggage car .
He opened his eyes , and into them came the unbridled anger of a kidnapped king .
The man sprang for his throat , but Buck was too quick for him .
His jaws closed on the hand , nor did they relax till his senses were choked out of him once more .
“ Yep , has fits , ” the man said , hiding his mangled hand from the baggageman , who had been attracted by the sounds of struggle .
“ I 'm takin ' 'm up for the boss to ' Frisco .
A crack dog-doctor there thinks that he can cure 'm . ”
Concerning that night 's ride , the man spoke most eloquently for himself , in a little shed back of a saloon on the San Francisco water front .
“ All I get is fifty for it , ” he grumbled ; “ an ' I would n't do it over for a thousand , cold cash . ”
His hand was wrapped in a bloody handkerchief , and the right trouser leg was ripped from knee to ankle .
“ How much did the other mug get ? ”
the saloon-keeper demanded .
“ A hundred , ” was the reply .
“ Would n't take a sou less , so help me . ”
“ That makes a hundred and fifty , ” the saloon-keeper calculated ; “ and he 's worth it , or I 'm a squarehead . ”
The kidnapper undid the bloody wrappings and looked at his lacerated hand .
“ If I do n't get the hydrophoby -- ” “ It 'll be because you was born to hang , ” laughed the saloon-keeper .
“ Here , lend me a hand before you pull your freight , ” he added .
Dazed , suffering intolerable pain from throat and tongue , with the life half throttled out of him , Buck attempted to face his tormentors .
But he was thrown down and choked repeatedly , till they succeeded in filing the heavy brass collar from off his neck .
Then the rope was removed , and he was flung into a cagelike crate .
There he lay for the remainder of the weary night , nursing his wrath and wounded pride .
He could not understand what it all meant .
What did they want with him , these strange men ?
Why were they keeping him pent up in this narrow crate ?
He did not know why , but he felt oppressed by the vague sense of impending calamity .
Several times during the night he sprang to his feet when the shed door rattled open , expecting to see the Judge , or the boys at least .
But each time it was the bulging face of the saloon-keeper that peered in at him by the sickly light of a tallow candle .
And each time the joyful bark that trembled in Buck 's throat was twisted into a savage growl .
But the saloon-keeper let him alone , and in the morning four men entered and picked up the crate .
More tormentors , Buck decided , for they were evil-looking creatures , ragged and unkempt ; and he stormed and raged at them through the bars .
They only laughed and poked sticks at him , which he promptly assailed with his teeth till he realized that that was what they wanted .
Whereupon he lay down sullenly and allowed the crate to be lifted into a wagon .
Then he , and the crate in which he was imprisoned , began a passage through many hands .
Clerks in the express office took charge of him ; he was carted about in another wagon ; a truck carried him , with an assortment of boxes and parcels , upon a ferry steamer ; he was trucked off the steamer into a great railway depot , and finally he was deposited in an express car .
CHAPTER I I MEET SIR HENRY CURTIS It is a curious thing that at my age -- fifty-five last birthday -- I should find myself taking up a pen to try to write a history .
I wonder what sort of a history it will be when I have finished it , if ever I come to the end of the trip !
I have done a good many things in my life , which seems a long one to me , owing to my having begun work so young , perhaps .
At an age when other boys are at school I was earning my living as a trader in the old Colony .
I have been trading , hunting , fighting , or mining ever since .
And yet it is only eight months ago that I made my pile .
It is a big pile now that I have got it -- I do n't yet know how big -- but I do not think I would go through the last fifteen or sixteen months again for it ; no , not if I knew that I should come out safe at the end , pile and all .
But then I am a timid man , and dislike violence ; moreover , I am almost sick of adventure .
I wonder why I am going to write this book : it is not in my line .
I am not a literary man , though very devoted to the Old Testament and also to the " Ingoldsby Legends . "
Let me try to set down my reasons , just to see if I have any .
First reason : Because Sir Henry Curtis and Captain John Good asked me .
Second reason : Because I am laid up here at Durban with the pain in my left leg .
Ever since that confounded lion got hold of me I have been liable to this trouble , and being rather bad just now , it makes me limp more than ever .
There must be some poison in a lion 's teeth , otherwise how is it that when your wounds are healed they break out again , generally , mark you , at the same time of year that you got your mauling ?
It is a hard thing when one has shot sixty-five lions or more , as I have in the course of my life , that the sixty-sixth should chew your leg like a quid of tobacco .
It breaks the routine of the thing , and putting other considerations aside , I am an orderly man and do n't like that .
This is by the way .
Third reason : Because I want my boy Harry , who is over there at the hospital in London studying to become a doctor , to have something to amuse him and keep him out of mischief for a week or so .
Hospital work must sometimes pall and grow rather dull , for even of cutting up dead bodies there may come satiety , and as this history will not be dull , whatever else it may be , it will put a little life into things for a day or two while Harry is reading of our adventures .
Fourth reason and last : Because I am going to tell the strangest story that I remember .
It may seem a queer thing to say , especially considering that there is no woman in it -- except Foulata .
Stop , though !
there is Gagaoola , if she was a woman , and not a fiend .
But she was a hundred at least , and therefore not marriageable , so I do n't count her .
At any rate , I can safely say that there is not a _ petticoat _ in the whole history .
Well , I had better come to the yoke .
It is a stiff place , and I feel as though I were bogged up to the axle .
But , " _ sutjes , sutjes _ , " as the Boers say -- I am sure I do n't know how they spell it -- softly does it .
A strong team will come through at last , that is , if they are not too poor .
You can never do anything with poor oxen .
Now to make a start .
I , Allan Quatermain , of Durban , Natal , Gentleman , make oath and say -- That 's how I headed my deposition before the magistrate about poor Khiva 's and Ventvögel 's sad deaths ; but somehow it does n't seem quite the right way to begin a book .
And , besides , am I a gentleman ?
What is a gentleman ?
I do n't quite know , and yet I have had to do with niggers -- no , I will scratch out that word " niggers , " for I do not like it .
I 've known natives who _ are _ , and so you will say , Harry , my boy , before you have done with this tale , and I have known mean whites with lots of money and fresh out from home , too , who _ are not _ .
At any rate , I was born a gentleman , though I have been nothing but a poor travelling trader and hunter all my life .
Whether I have remained so I known not , you must judge of that .
Heaven knows I 've tried .
I have killed many men in my time , yet I have never slain wantonly or stained my hand in innocent blood , but only in self-defence .
The Almighty gave us our lives , and I suppose He meant us to defend them , at least I have always acted on that , and I hope it will not be brought up against me when my clock strikes .
There , there , it is a cruel and a wicked world , and for a timid man I have been mixed up in a great deal of fighting .
I can not tell the rights of it , but at any rate I have never stolen , though once I cheated a Kafir out of a herd of cattle .
But then he had done me a dirty turn , and it has troubled me ever since into the bargain .
Well , it is eighteen months or so ago since first I met Sir Henry Curtis and Captain Good .
It was in this way .
I had been up elephant hunting beyond Bamangwato , and had met with bad luck .
Everything went wrong that trip , and to top up with I got the fever badly .
So soon as I was well enough I trekked down to the Diamond Fields , sold such ivory as I had , together with my wagon and oxen , discharged my hunters , and took the post-cart to the Cape .
After spending a week in Cape Town , finding that they overcharged me at the hotel , and having seen everything there was to see , including the botanical gardens , which seem to me likely to confer a great benefit on the country , and the new Houses of Parliament , which I expect will do nothing of the sort , I determined to go back to Natal by the _ Dunkeld _ , then lying at the docks waiting for the _ Edinburgh Castle _ due in from England .
I took my berth and went aboard , and that afternoon the Natal passengers from the _ Edinburgh Castle _ transhipped , and we weighed and put to sea .
Among these passengers who came on board were two who excited my curiosity .
One , a gentleman of about thirty , was perhaps the biggest-chested and longest-armed man I ever saw .
He had yellow hair , a thick yellow beard , clear-cut features , and large grey eyes set deep in his head .
I never saw a finer-looking man , and somehow he reminded me of an ancient Dane .
Not that I know much of ancient Danes , though I knew a modern Dane who did me out of ten pounds ; but I remember once seeing a picture of some of those gentry , who , I take it , were a kind of white Zulus .
They were drinking out of big horns , and their long hair hung down their backs .
As I looked at my friend standing there by the companion-ladder , I thought that if he only let his grow a little , put one of those chain shirts on to his great shoulders , and took hold of a battle-axe and a horn mug , he might have sat as a model for that picture .
And by the way it is a curious thing , and just shows how the blood will out , I discovered afterwards that Sir Henry Curtis , for that was the big man 's name , is of Danish blood .
[ 1 ] He also reminded me strongly of somebody else , but at the time I could not remember who it was .
The other man , who stood talking to Sir Henry , was stout and dark , and of quite a different cut .
I suspected at once that he was a naval officer ; I do n't know why , but it is difficult to mistake a navy man .
I have gone shooting trips with several of them in the course of my life , and they have always proved themselves the best and bravest and nicest fellows I ever met , though sadly given , some of them , to the use of profane language .
I asked a page or two back , what is a gentleman ?
I 'll answer the question now : A Royal Naval officer is , in a general sort of way , though of course there may be a black sheep among them here and there .
I fancy it is just the wide seas and the breath of God 's winds that wash their hearts and blow the bitterness out of their minds and make them what men ought to be .
Well , to return , I proved right again ; I ascertained that the dark man _ was _ a naval officer , a lieutenant of thirty-one , who , after seventeen years ' service , had been turned out of her Majesty 's employ with the barren honour of a commander 's rank , because it was impossible that he should be promoted .
This is what people who serve the Queen have to expect : to be shot out into the cold world to find a living just when they are beginning really to understand their work , and to reach the prime of life .
I suppose they do n't mind it , but for my own part I had rather earn my bread as a hunter .
One 's halfpence are as scarce perhaps , but you do not get so many kicks .
The officer 's name I found out -- by referring to the passengers ' lists -- was Good -- Captain John Good .
He was broad , of medium height , dark , stout , and rather a curious man to look at .
He was so very neat and so very clean-shaved , and he always wore an eye-glass in his right eye .
It seemed to grow there , for it had no string , and he never took it out except to wipe it .
At first I thought he used to sleep in it , but afterwards I found that this was a mistake .
He put it in his trousers pocket when he went to bed , together with his false teeth , of which he had two beautiful sets that , my own being none of the best , have often caused me to break the tenth commandment .
But I am anticipating .
PART ONE CHAPTER I THE EARLY MARRIED LIFE OF THE MORELS “ THE BOTTOMS ” succeeded to “ Hell Row ” .
Hell Row was a block of thatched , bulging cottages that stood by the brookside on Greenhill Lane .
There lived the colliers who worked in the little gin-pits two fields away .
The brook ran under the alder trees , scarcely soiled by these small mines , whose coal was drawn to the surface by donkeys that plodded wearily in a circle round a gin .
And all over the countryside were these same pits , some of which had been worked in the time of Charles II , the few colliers and the donkeys burrowing down like ants into the earth , making queer mounds and little black places among the corn-fields and the meadows .
And the cottages of these coal-miners , in blocks and pairs here and there , together with odd farms and homes of the stockingers , straying over the parish , formed the village of Bestwood .
Then , some sixty years ago , a sudden change took place , gin-pits were elbowed aside by the large mines of the financiers .
The coal and iron field of Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire was discovered .
Carston , Waite and Co. appeared .
Amid tremendous excitement , Lord Palmerston formally opened the company 's first mine at Spinney Park , on the edge of Sherwood Forest .
About this time the notorious Hell Row , which through growing old had acquired an evil reputation , was burned down , and much dirt was cleansed away .
Carston , Waite & Co. found they had struck on a good thing , so , down the valleys of the brooks from Selby and Nuttall , new mines were sunk , until soon there were six pits working .
From Nuttall , high up on the sandstone among the woods , the railway ran , past the ruined priory of the Carthusians and past Robin Hood 's Well , down to Spinney Park , then on to Minton , a large mine among corn-fields ; from Minton across the farmlands of the valleyside to Bunker 's Hill , branching off there , and running north to Beggarlee and Selby , that looks over at Crich and the hills of Derbyshire : six mines like black studs on the countryside , linked by a loop of fine chain , the railway .
To accommodate the regiments of miners , Carston , Waite and Co. built the Squares , great quadrangles of dwellings on the hillside of Bestwood , and then , in the brook valley , on the site of Hell Row , they erected the Bottoms .
The Bottoms consisted of six blocks of miners ' dwellings , two rows of three , like the dots on a blank-six domino , and twelve houses in a block .
This double row of dwellings sat at the foot of the rather sharp slope from Bestwood , and looked out , from the attic windows at least , on the slow climb of the valley towards Selby .
The houses themselves were substantial and very decent .
One could walk all round , seeing little front gardens with auriculas and saxifrage in the shadow of the bottom block , sweet-williams and pinks in the sunny top block ; seeing neat front windows , little porches , little privet hedges , and dormer windows for the attics .
But that was outside ; that was the view on to the uninhabited parlours of all the colliers ' wives .
The dwelling-room , the kitchen , was at the back of the house , facing inward between the blocks , looking at a scrubby back garden , and then at the ash-pits .
And between the rows , between the long lines of ash-pits , went the alley , where the children played and the women gossiped and the men smoked .
So , the actual conditions of living in the Bottoms , that was so well built and that looked so nice , were quite unsavoury because people must live in the kitchen , and the kitchens opened on to that nasty alley of ash-pits .
Mrs. Morel was not anxious to move into the Bottoms , which was already twelve years old and on the downward path , when she descended to it from Bestwood .
But it was the best she could do .
Moreover , she had an end house in one of the top blocks , and thus had only one neighbour ; on the other side an extra strip of garden .
And , having an end house , she enjoyed a kind of aristocracy among the other women of the “ between ” houses , because her rent was five shillings and sixpence instead of five shillings a week .
But this superiority in station was not much consolation to Mrs. Morel .
She was thirty-one years old , and had been married eight years .
A rather small woman , of delicate mould but resolute bearing , she shrank a little from the first contact with the Bottoms women .
She came down in the July , and in the September expected her third baby .
Her husband was a miner .
They had only been in their new home three weeks when the wakes , or fair , began .
Morel , she knew , was sure to make a holiday of it .
He went off early on the Monday morning , the day of the fair .
The two children were highly excited .
William , a boy of seven , fled off immediately after breakfast , to prowl round the wakes ground , leaving Annie , who was only five , to whine all morning to go also .
Mrs. Morel did her work .
She scarcely knew her neighbours yet , and knew no one with whom to trust the little girl .
So she promised to take her to the wakes after dinner .
William appeared at half-past twelve .
He was a very active lad , fair-haired , freckled , with a touch of the Dane or Norwegian about him .
“ Can I have my dinner , mother ? ”
he cried , rushing in with his cap on .
“ 'Cause it begins at half-past one , the man says so . ”
“ You can have your dinner as soon as it 's done , ” replied the mother .
“ Is n't it done ? ”
he cried , his blue eyes staring at her in indignation .
“ Then I 'm goin ' be-out it . ”
“ You 'll do nothing of the sort .
It will be done in five minutes .
It is only half-past twelve . ”
“ They 'll be beginnin ' , ” the boy half cried , half shouted .
“ You wo n't die if they do , ” said the mother .
“ Besides , it 's only half-past twelve , so you 've a full hour . ”
The lad began hastily to lay the table , and directly the three sat down .
They were eating batter-pudding and jam , when the boy jumped off his chair and stood perfectly stiff .
Some distance away could be heard the first small braying of a merry-go-round , and the tooting of a horn .
His face quivered as he looked at his mother .
“ I told you ! ”
he said , running to the dresser for his cap .
“ Take your pudding in your hand -- and it 's only five past one , so you were wrong -- you have n't got your twopence , ” cried the mother in a breath .
The boy came back , bitterly disappointed , for his twopence , then went off without a word .
“ I want to go , I want to go , ” said Annie , beginning to cry .
“ Well , and you shall go , whining , wizzening little stick ! ”
said the mother .
And later in the afternoon she trudged up the hill under the tall hedge with her child .
The hay was gathered from the fields , and cattle were turned on to the eddish .
It was warm , peaceful .
Mrs. Morel did not like the wakes .
There were two sets of horses , one going by steam , one pulled round by a pony ; three organs were grinding , and there came odd cracks of pistol-shots , fearful screeching of the cocoanut man 's rattle , shouts of the Aunt Sally man , screeches from the peep-show lady .
The mother perceived her son gazing enraptured outside the Lion Wallace booth , at the pictures of this famous lion that had killed a negro and maimed for life two white men .
She left him alone , and went to get Annie a spin of toffee .
Presently the lad stood in front of her , wildly excited .
“ You never said you was coming -- is n't the ' a lot of things ?
-- that lion 's killed three men -- I 've spent my tuppence -- an ' look here . ”
He pulled from his pocket two egg-cups , with pink moss-roses on them .
“ I got these from that stall where y' ave ter get them marbles in them holes .
An ' I got these two in two goes - ' aepenny a go-they 've got moss-roses on , look here .
I wanted these . ”
She knew he wanted them for her .
“ H 'm ! ”
she said , pleased .
“ They ARE pretty ! ”
“ Shall you carry 'em , 'cause I 'm frightened o ' breakin ' 'em ? ”
He was tipful of excitement now she had come , led her about the ground , showed her everything .
Then , at the peep-show , she explained the pictures , in a sort of story , to which he listened as if spellbound .
He would not leave her .
All the time he stuck close to her , bristling with a small boy 's pride of her .
For no other woman looked such a lady as she did , in her little black bonnet and her cloak .
She smiled when she saw women she knew .
When she was tired she said to her son : “ Well , are you coming now , or later ? ”
“ Are you goin ' a ' ready ? ”
he cried , his face full of reproach .
“ Already ?
It is past four , I know . ”
“ What are you goin ' a ' ready for ? ”
he lamented .
“ You need n't come if you do n't want , ” she said .
And she went slowly away with her little girl , whilst her son stood watching her , cut to the heart to let her go , and yet unable to leave the wakes .
As she crossed the open ground in front of the Moon and Stars she heard men shouting , and smelled the beer , and hurried a little , thinking her husband was probably in the bar .
At about half-past six her son came home , tired now , rather pale , and somewhat wretched .
He was miserable , though he did not know it , because he had let her go alone .
Since she had gone , he had not enjoyed his wakes .
“ Has my dad been ? ”
he asked .
“ No , ” said the mother .
I The Nellie , a cruising yawl , swung to her anchor without a flutter of the sails , and was at rest .
The flood had made , the wind was nearly calm , and being bound down the river , the only thing for it was to come to and wait for the turn of the tide .
The sea-reach of the Thames stretched before us like the beginning of an interminable waterway .
In the offing the sea and the sky were welded together without a joint , and in the luminous space the tanned sails of the barges drifting up with the tide seemed to stand still in red clusters of canvas sharply peaked , with gleams of varnished sprits .
A haze rested on the low shores that ran out to sea in vanishing flatness .
The air was dark above Gravesend , and farther back still seemed condensed into a mournful gloom , brooding motionless over the biggest , and the greatest , town on earth .
The Director of Companies was our captain and our host .
We four affectionately watched his back as he stood in the bows looking to seaward .
On the whole river there was nothing that looked half so nautical .
He resembled a pilot , which to a seaman is trustworthiness personified .
It was difficult to realize his work was not out there in the luminous estuary , but behind him , within the brooding gloom .
Between us there was , as I have already said somewhere , the bond of the sea .
Besides holding our hearts together through long periods of separation , it had the effect of making us tolerant of each other 's yarns -- and even convictions .
The Lawyer -- the best of old fellows -- had , because of his many years and many virtues , the only cushion on deck , and was lying on the only rug .
The Accountant had brought out already a box of dominoes , and was toying architecturally with the bones .
Marlow sat cross-legged right aft , leaning against the mizzen-mast .
He had sunken cheeks , a yellow complexion , a straight back , an ascetic aspect , and , with his arms dropped , the palms of hands outwards , resembled an idol .
The director , satisfied the anchor had good hold , made his way aft and sat down amongst us .
We exchanged a few words lazily .
Afterwards there was silence on board the yacht .
For some reason or other we did not begin that game of dominoes .
We felt meditative , and fit for nothing but placid staring .
The day was ending in a serenity of still and exquisite brilliance .
The water shone pacifically ; the sky , without a speck , was a benign immensity of unstained light ; the very mist on the Essex marsh was like a gauzy and radiant fabric , hung from the wooded rises inland , and draping the low shores in diaphanous folds .
Only the gloom to the west , brooding over the upper reaches , became more sombre every minute , as if angered by the approach of the sun .
And at last , in its curved and imperceptible fall , the sun sank low , and from glowing white changed to a dull red without rays and without heat , as if about to go out suddenly , stricken to death by the touch of that gloom brooding over a crowd of men .
Forthwith a change came over the waters , and the serenity became less brilliant but more profound .
The old river in its broad reach rested unruffled at the decline of day , after ages of good service done to the race that peopled its banks , spread out in the tranquil dignity of a waterway leading to the uttermost ends of the earth .
We looked at the venerable stream not in the vivid flush of a short day that comes and departs for ever , but in the august light of abiding memories .
And indeed nothing is easier for a man who has , as the phrase goes , “ followed the sea ” with reverence and affection , than to evoke the great spirit of the past upon the lower reaches of the Thames .
The tidal current runs to and fro in its unceasing service , crowded with memories of men and ships it had borne to the rest of home or to the battles of the sea .
It had known and served all the men of whom the nation is proud , from Sir Francis Drake to Sir John Franklin , knights all , titled and untitled -- the great knights-errant of the sea .
It had borne all the ships whose names are like jewels flashing in the night of time , from the _ Golden Hind _ returning with her rotund flanks full of treasure , to be visited by the Queen 's Highness and thus pass out of the gigantic tale , to the _ Erebus _ and _ Terror _ , bound on other conquests -- and that never returned .
It had known the ships and the men .
They had sailed from Deptford , from Greenwich , from Erith -- the adventurers and the settlers ; kings ' ships and the ships of men on ' Change ; captains , admirals , the dark “ interlopers ” of the Eastern trade , and the commissioned “ generals ” of East India fleets .
Hunters for gold or pursuers of fame , they all had gone out on that stream , bearing the sword , and often the torch , messengers of the might within the land , bearers of a spark from the sacred fire .
What greatness had not floated on the ebb of that river into the mystery of an unknown earth !
... The dreams of men , the seed of commonwealths , the germs of empires .
The sun set ; the dusk fell on the stream , and lights began to appear along the shore .
The Chapman light-house , a three-legged thing erect on a mud-flat , shone strongly .
Lights of ships moved in the fairway -- a great stir of lights going up and going down .
And farther west on the upper reaches the place of the monstrous town was still marked ominously on the sky , a brooding gloom in sunshine , a lurid glare under the stars .
“ And this also , ” said Marlow suddenly , “ has been one of the dark places of the earth . ”
He was the only man of us who still “ followed the sea . ”
The worst that could be said of him was that he did not represent his class .
He was a seaman , but he was a wanderer , too , while most seamen lead , if one may so express it , a sedentary life .
Their minds are of the stay-at-home order , and their home is always with them -- the ship ; and so is their country -- the sea .
One ship is very much like another , and the sea is always the same .
In the immutability of their surroundings the foreign shores , the foreign faces , the changing immensity of life , glide past , veiled not by a sense of mystery but by a slightly disdainful ignorance ; for there is nothing mysterious to a seaman unless it be the sea itself , which is the mistress of his existence and as inscrutable as Destiny .
For the rest , after his hours of work , a casual stroll or a casual spree on shore suffices to unfold for him the secret of a whole continent , and generally he finds the secret not worth knowing .
The yarns of seamen have a direct simplicity , the whole meaning of which lies within the shell of a cracked nut .
But Marlow was not typical ( if his propensity to spin yarns be excepted ) , and to him the meaning of an episode was not inside like a kernel but outside , enveloping the tale which brought it out only as a glow brings out a haze , in the likeness of one of these misty halos that sometimes are made visible by the spectral illumination of moonshine .
His remark did not seem at all surprising .
It was just like Marlow .
It was accepted in silence .
No one took the trouble to grunt even ; and presently he said , very slow -- “ I was thinking of very old times , when the Romans first came here , nineteen hundred years ago -- the other day ... .
Light came out of this river since -- you say Knights ?
Yes ; but it is like a running blaze on a plain , like a flash of lightning in the clouds .
We live in the flicker -- may it last as long as the old earth keeps rolling !
But darkness was here yesterday .
Imagine the feelings of a commander of a fine -- what d'ye call 'em ?
-- trireme in the Mediterranean , ordered suddenly to the north ; run overland across the Gauls in a hurry ; put in charge of one of these craft the legionaries -- a wonderful lot of handy men they must have been , too -- used to build , apparently by the hundred , in a month or two , if we may believe what we read .
Imagine him here -- the very end of the world , a sea the colour of lead , a sky the colour of smoke , a kind of ship about as rigid as a concertina -- and going up this river with stores , or orders , or what you like .
Sand-banks , marshes , forests , savages , -- precious little to eat fit for a civilized man , nothing but Thames water to drink .
No Falernian wine here , no going ashore .
Here and there a military camp lost in a wilderness , like a needle in a bundle of hay -- cold , fog , tempests , disease , exile , and death -- death skulking in the air , in the water , in the bush .
They must have been dying like flies here .
Oh , yes -- he did it .
Did it very well , too , no doubt , and without thinking much about it either , except afterwards to brag of what he had gone through in his time , perhaps .
They were men enough to face the darkness .
And perhaps he was cheered by keeping his eye on a chance of promotion to the fleet at Ravenna by and by , if he had good friends in Rome and survived the awful climate .
Or think of a decent young citizen in a toga -- perhaps too much dice , you know -- coming out here in the train of some prefect , or tax-gatherer , or trader even , to mend his fortunes .
Land in a swamp , march through the woods , and in some inland post feel the savagery , the utter savagery , had closed round him -- all that mysterious life of the wilderness that stirs in the forest , in the jungles , in the hearts of wild men .
There 's no initiation either into such mysteries .
He has to live in the midst of the incomprehensible , which is also detestable .
And it has a fascination , too , that goes to work upon him .
The fascination of the abomination -- you know , imagine the growing regrets , the longing to escape , the powerless disgust , the surrender , the hate . ”
Chapter I .
THE MAGNET ATTRACTING -- A WAIF AMID FORCES When Caroline Meeber boarded the afternoon train for Chicago , her total outfit consisted of a small trunk , a cheap imitation alligator-skin satchel , a small lunch in a paper box , and a yellow leather snap purse , containing her ticket , a scrap of paper with her sister 's address in Van Buren Street , and four dollars in money .
It was in August , 1889 .
She was eighteen years of age , bright , timid , and full of the illusions of ignorance and youth .
Whatever touch of regret at parting characterised her thoughts , it was certainly not for advantages now being given up .
A gush of tears at her mother 's farewell kiss , a touch in her throat when the cars clacked by the flour mill where her father worked by the day , a pathetic sigh as the familiar green environs of the village passed in review , and the threads which bound her so lightly to girlhood and home were irretrievably broken .
To be sure there was always the next station , where one might descend and return .
There was the great city , bound more closely by these very trains which came up daily .
Columbia City was not so very far away , even once she was in Chicago .
What , pray , is a few hours -- a few hundred miles ?
She looked at the little slip bearing her sister 's address and wondered .
She gazed at the green landscape , now passing in swift review , until her swifter thoughts replaced its impression with vague conjectures of what Chicago might be .
When a girl leaves her home at eighteen , she does one of two things .
Either she falls into saving hands and becomes better , or she rapidly assumes the cosmopolitan standard of virtue and becomes worse .
Of an intermediate balance , under the circumstances , there is no possibility .
The city has its cunning wiles , no less than the infinitely smaller and more human tempter .
There are large forces which allure with all the soulfulness of expression possible in the most cultured human .
The gleam of a thousand lights is often as effective as the persuasive light in a wooing and fascinating eye .
Half the undoing of the unsophisticated and natural mind is accomplished by forces wholly superhuman .
A blare of sound , a roar of life , a vast array of human hives , appeal to the astonished senses in equivocal terms .
Without a counsellor at hand to whisper cautious interpretations , what falsehoods may not these things breathe into the unguarded ear !
Unrecognised for what they are , their beauty , like music , too often relaxes , then weakens , then perverts the simpler human perceptions .
Caroline , or Sister Carrie , as she had been half affectionately termed by the family , was possessed of a mind rudimentary in its power of observation and analysis .
Self-interest with her was high , but not strong .
It was , nevertheless , her guiding characteristic .
Warm with the fancies of youth , pretty with the insipid prettiness of the formative period , possessed of a figure promising eventual shapeliness and an eye alight with certain native intelligence , she was a fair example of the middle American class -- two generations removed from the emigrant .
Books were beyond her interest -- knowledge a sealed book .
In the intuitive graces she was still crude .
She could scarcely toss her head gracefully .
Her hands were almost ineffectual .
The feet , though small , were set flatly .
And yet she was interested in her charms , quick to understand the keener pleasures of life , ambitious to gain in material things .
A half-equipped little knight she was , venturing to reconnoitre the mysterious city and dreaming wild dreams of some vague , far-off supremacy , which should make it prey and subject -- the proper penitent , grovelling at a woman 's slipper .
“ That , ” said a voice in her ear , “ is one of the prettiest little resorts in Wisconsin . ”
“ Is it ? ”
she answered nervously .
The train was just pulling out of Waukesha .
For some time she had been conscious of a man behind .
She felt him observing her mass of hair .
He had been fidgetting , and with natural intuition she felt a certain interest growing in that quarter .
Her maidenly reserve , and a certain sense of what was conventional under the circumstances , called her to forestall and deny this familiarity , but the daring and magnetism of the individual , born of past experiences and triumphs , prevailed .
She answered .
He leaned forward to put his elbows upon the back of her seat and proceeded to make himself volubly agreeable .
“ Yes , that is a great resort for Chicago people .
The hotels are swell .
You are not familiar with this part of the country , are you ? ”
“ Oh , yes , I am , ” answered Carrie .
“ That is , I live at Columbia City .
I have never been through here , though . ”
“ And so this is your first visit to Chicago , ” he observed .
All the time she was conscious of certain features out of the side of her eye .
Flush , colourful cheeks , a light moustache , a grey fedora hat .
She now turned and looked upon him in full , the instincts of self-protection and coquetry mingling confusedly in her brain .
“ I did n't say that , ” she said .
“ Oh , ” he answered , in a very pleasing way and with an assumed air of mistake , “ I thought you did . ”
Here was a type of the travelling canvasser for a manufacturing house -- a class which at that time was first being dubbed by the slang of the day “ drummers . ”
He came within the meaning of a still newer term , which had sprung into general use among Americans in 1880 , and which concisely expressed the thought of one whose dress or manners are calculated to elicit the admiration of susceptible young women -- a “ masher . ”
His suit was of a striped and crossed pattern of brown wool , new at that time , but since become familiar as a business suit .
The low crotch of the vest revealed a stiff shirt bosom of white and pink stripes .
From his coat sleeves protruded a pair of linen cuffs of the same pattern , fastened with large , gold plate buttons , set with the common yellow agates known as “ cat 's - eyes . ”
His fingers bore several rings -- one , the ever-enduring heavy seal -- and from his vest dangled a neat gold watch chain , from which was suspended the secret insignia of the Order of Elks .
The whole suit was rather tight-fitting , and was finished off with heavy-soled tan shoes , highly polished , and the grey fedora hat .
He was , for the order of intellect represented , attractive , and whatever he had to recommend him , you may be sure was not lost upon Carrie , in this , her first glance .
Lest this order of individual should permanently pass , let me put down some of the most striking characteristics of his most successful manner and method .
Good clothes , of course , were the first essential , the things without which he was nothing .
A strong physical nature , actuated by a keen desire for the feminine , was the next .
A mind free of any consideration of the problems or forces of the world and actuated not by greed , but an insatiable love of variable pleasure .
His method was always simple .
Its principal element was daring , backed , of course , by an intense desire and admiration for the sex .
Let him meet with a young woman once and he would approach her with an air of kindly familiarity , not unmixed with pleading , which would result in most cases in a tolerant acceptance .
If she showed any tendency to coquetry he would be apt to straighten her tie , or if she “ took up ” with him at all , to call her by her first name .
If he visited a department store it was to lounge familiarly over the counter and ask some leading questions .
In more exclusive circles , on the train or in waiting stations , he went slower .
If some seemingly vulnerable object appeared he was all attention -- to pass the compliments of the day , to lead the way to the parlor car , carrying her grip , or , failing that , to take a seat next her with the hope of being able to court her to her destination .
Pillows , books , a footstool , the shade lowered ; all these figured in the things which he could do .
If , when she reached her destination he did not alight and attend her baggage for her , it was because , in his own estimation , he had signally failed .
A woman should some day write the complete philosophy of clothes .
No matter how young , it is one of the things she wholly comprehends .
There is an indescribably faint line in the matter of man 's apparel which somehow divides for her those who are worth glancing at and those who are not .
Once an individual has passed this faint line on the way downward he will get no glance from her .
There is another line at which the dress of a man will cause her to study her own .
This line the individual at her elbow now marked for Carrie .
She became conscious of an inequality .
Her own plain blue dress , with its black cotton tape trimmings , now seemed to her shabby .
She felt the worn state of her shoes .
“ Let 's see , ” he went on , “ I know quite a number of people in your town .
Morgenroth the clothier and Gibson the dry goods man . ”
“ Oh , do you ? ”
she interrupted , aroused by memories of longings their show windows had cost her .
At last he had a clew to her interest , and followed it deftly .
In a few minutes he had come about into her seat .
He talked of sales of clothing , his travels , Chicago , and the amusements of that city .
“ If you are going there , you will enjoy it immensely .
Have you relatives ? ”
“ I am going to visit my sister , ” she explained .
“ You want to see Lincoln Park , ” he said , “ and Michigan Boulevard .
They are putting up great buildings there .
It 's a second New York -- great .
So much to see -- theatres , crowds , fine houses -- oh , you 'll like that . ”
There was a little ache in her fancy of all he described .
Her insignificance in the presence of so much magnificence faintly affected her .
She realised that hers was not to be a round of pleasure , and yet there was something promising in all the material prospect he set forth .
There was something satisfactory in the attention of this individual with his good clothes .
She could not help smiling as he told her of some popular actress of whom she reminded him .
She was not silly , and yet attention of this sort had its weight .
STONE GATE , WORCESTER , MASSACHUSETTS , December 27 .
Dear Judy : Your letter is here .
I have read it twice , and with amazement .
Do I understand that Jervis has given you , for a Christmas present , the making over of the John Grier Home into a model institution , and that you have chosen me to disburse the money ?
Me -- I , Sallie McBride , the head of an orphan asylum !
My poor people , have you lost your senses , or have you become addicted to the use of opium , and is this the raving of two fevered imaginations ?
I am exactly as well fitted to take care of one hundred children as to become the curator of a zoo .
And you offer as bait an interesting Scotch doctor ?
My dear Judy , -- likewise my dear Jervis , -- I see through you !
I know exactly the kind of family conference that has been held about the Pendleton fireside .
" Is n't it a pity that Sallie has n't amounted to more since she left college ?
She ought to be doing something useful instead of frittering her time away in the petty social life of Worcester .
Also [ Jervis speaks ] she is getting interested in that confounded young Hallock , too good-looking and fascinating and erratic ; I never did like politicians .
We must deflect her mind with some uplifting and absorbing occupation until the danger is past .
Ha !
I have it !
We will put her in charge of the John Grier Home . "
Oh , I can hear him as clearly as if I were there !
On the occasion of my last visit in your delectable household Jervis and I had a very solemn conversation in regard to ( 1 ) marriage , ( 2 ) the low ideals of politicians , ( 3 ) the frivolous , useless lives that society women lead .
Please tell your moral husband that I took his words deeply to heart , and that ever since my return to Worcester I have been spending one afternoon a week reading poetry with the inmates of the Female Inebriate Asylum .
My life is not so purposeless as it appears .
Also let me assure you that the politician is not dangerously imminent ; and that , anyway , he is a very desirable politician , even though his views on tariff and single tax and trade-unionism do not exactly coincide with Jervis 's .
Your desire to dedicate my life to the public good is very sweet , but you should look at it from the asylum 's point of view .
Have you no pity for those poor defenseless little orphan children ?
I have , if you have n't , and I respectfully decline the position which you offer .
I shall be charmed , however , to accept your invitation to visit you in New York , though I must acknowledge that I am not very excited over the list of gaieties you have planned .
Please substitute for the New York Orphanage and the Foundling Hospital a few theaters and operas and a dinner or so .
I have two new evening gowns and a blue and gold coat with a white fur collar .
I dash to pack them ; so telegraph fast if you do n't wish to see me for myself alone , but only as a successor to Mrs. Lippett .
Yours as ever , Entirely frivolous , And intending to remain so , SALLIE McBRIDE .
P.S. Your invitation is especially seasonable .
A charming young politician named Gordon Hallock is to be in New York next week .
I am sure you will like him when you know him better .
P.S. 2 .
Sallie taking her afternoon walk as Judy would like to see her : I ask you again , have you both gone mad ?
THE JOHN GRIER HOME , February 15 .
Dear Judy : We arrived in a snowstorm at eleven last night , Singapore and Jane and I .
It does not appear to be customary for superintendents of orphan asylums to bring with them personal maids and Chinese chows .
The night watchman and housekeeper , who had waited up to receive me , were thrown into an awful flutter .
They had never seen the like of Sing , and thought that I was introducing a wolf into the fold .
I reassured them as to his dogginess , and the watchman , after studying his black tongue , ventured a witticism .
He wanted to know if I fed him on huckleberry pie .
It was difficult to find accommodations for my family .
Poor Sing was dragged off whimpering to a strange woodshed , and given a piece of burlap .
Jane did not fare much better .
There was not an extra bed in the building , barring a five-foot crib in the hospital room .
She , as you know , approaches six .
We tucked her in , and she spent the night folded up like a jackknife .
She has limped about today , looking like a decrepit letter S , openly deploring this latest escapade on the part of her flighty mistress , and longing for the time when we shall come to our senses , and return to the parental fireside in Worcester .
I know that she is going to spoil all my chances of being popular with the rest of the staff .
Having her here is the silliest idea that was ever conceived , but you know my family .
I fought their objections step by step , but they made their last stand on Jane .
If I brought her along to see that I ate nourishing food and did n't stay up all night , I might come -- temporarily ; but if I refused to bring her -- oh , dear me , I am not sure that I was ever again to cross the threshold of Stone Gate !
So here we are , and neither of us very welcome , I am afraid .
I woke by a gong at six this morning , and lay for a time listening to the racket that twenty-five little girls made in the lavatory over my head .
It appears that they do not get baths , -- just face-washes , -- but they make as much splashing as twenty-five puppies in a pool .
I rose and dressed and explored a bit .
You were wise in not having me come to look the place over before I engaged .
While my little charges were at breakfast , it seemed a happy time to introduce myself ; so I sought the dining room .
Horror piled on horror -- those bare drab walls and oil-cloth-covered tables with tin cups and plates and wooden benches , and , by way of decoration , that one illuminated text , " The Lord Will Provide " !
The trustee who added that last touch must possess a grim sense of humor .
Really , Judy , I never knew there was any spot in the world so entirely ugly ; and when I saw those rows and rows of pale , listless , blue-uniformed children , the whole dismal business suddenly struck me with such a shock that I almost collapsed .
It seemed like an unachievable goal for one person to bring sunshine to one hundred little faces when what they need is a mother apiece .
I plunged into this thing lightly enough , partly because you were too persuasive , and mostly , I honestly think , because that scurrilous Gordon Hallock laughed so uproariously at the idea of my being able to manage an asylum .
Between you all you hypnotized me .
And then of course , after I began reading up on the subject and visiting all those seventeen institutions , I got excited over orphans , and wanted to put my own ideas into practice .
But now I 'm aghast at finding myself here ; it 's such a stupendous undertaking .
The future health and happiness of a hundred human beings lie in my hands , to say nothing of their three or four hundred children and thousand grandchildren .
The thing 's geometrically progressive .
It 's awful .
Who am I to undertake this job ?
Look , oh , look for another superintendent !
Jane says dinner 's ready .
Having eaten two of your institution meals , the thought of another does n't excite me .
LATER .
The staff had mutton hash and spinach , with tapioca pudding for dessert .
What the children had I hate to consider .
I started to tell you about my first official speech at breakfast this morning .
It dealt with all the wonderful new changes that are to come to the John Grier Home through the generosity of Mr. Jervis Pendleton , the president of our board of trustees , and of Mrs. Pendleton , the dear " Aunt Judy " of every little boy and girl here .
Please do n't object to my featuring the Pendleton family so prominently .
I did it for political reasons .
As the entire working staff of the institution was present , I thought it a good opportunity to emphasize the fact that all of these upsetting , innovations come straight from headquarters , and not out of my excitable brain .
The children stopped eating and stared .
The conspicuous color of my hair and the frivolous tilt of my nose are evidently new attributes in a superintendent .
My colleagues also showed plainly that they consider me too young and too inexperienced to be set in authority .
I have n't seen Jervis 's wonderful Scotch doctor yet , but I assure you that he will have to be VERY wonderful to make up for the rest of these people , especially the kindergarten teacher .
Miss Snaith and I clashed early on the subject of fresh air ; but I intend to get rid of this dreadful institution smell , if I freeze every child into a little ice statue .
This being a sunny , sparkling , snowy afternoon , I ordered that dungeon of a playroom closed and the children out of doors .
" She 's chasin ' us out , " I heard one small urchin grumbling as he struggled into a two-years-too-small overcoat .
They simply stood about the yard , all humped in their clothes , waiting patiently to be allowed to come back in .
No running or shouting or coasting or snowballs .
Think of it !
These children do n't know how to play .
STILL LATER .
I have already begun the congenial task of spending your money .
I bought eleven hot-water bottles this afternoon ( every one that the village drug store contained ) likewise some woolen blankets and padded quilts .
And the windows are wide open in the babies ' dormitory .
Those poor little tots are going to enjoy the perfectly new sensation of being able to breathe at night .
There are a million things I want to grumble about , but it 's half-past ten , and Jane says I MUST go to bed .
Yours in command , SALLIE McBRIDE .
P.S. Before turning in , I tiptoed through the corridor to make sure that all was right , and what do you think I found ?
Miss Snaith softly closing the windows in the babies ' dormitory !
Just as soon as I can find a suitable position for her in an old ladies ' home , I am going to discharge that woman .
CHAPTER 1 Loomings Call me Ishmael .
Some years ago -- never mind how long precisely -- having little or no money in my purse , and nothing particular to interest me on shore , I thought I would sail about a little and see the watery part of the world .
It is a way I have of driving off the spleen and regulating the circulation .
Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth ; whenever it is a damp , drizzly November in my soul ; whenever I find myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses , and bringing up the rear of every funeral I meet ; and especially whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me , that it requires a strong moral principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street , and methodically knocking people 's hats off -- then , I account it high time to get to sea as soon as I can .
This is my substitute for pistol and ball .
With a philosophical flourish Cato throws himself upon his sword ; I quietly take to the ship .
There is nothing surprising in this .
If they but knew it , almost all men in their degree , some time or other , cherish very nearly the same feelings towards the ocean with me .
There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes , belted round by wharves as Indian isles by coral reefs -- commerce surrounds it with her surf .
Right and left , the streets take you waterward .
Its extreme downtown is the battery , where that noble mole is washed by waves , and cooled by breezes , which a few hours previous were out of sight of land .
Look at the crowds of water-gazers there .
Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon .
Go from Corlears Hook to Coenties Slip , and from thence , by Whitehall , northward .
What do you see ?
-- Posted like silent sentinels all around the town , stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean reveries .
Some leaning against the spiles ; some seated upon the pier-heads ; some looking over the bulwarks glasses !
of ships from China ; some high aloft in the rigging , as if striving to get a still better seaward peep .
But these are all landsmen ; of week days pent up in lath and plaster -- tied to counters , nailed to benches , clinched to desks .
How then is this ?
Are the green fields gone ?
What do they here ?
But look !
here come more crowds , pacing straight for the water , and seemingly bound for a dive .
Strange !
Nothing will content them but the extremest limit of the land ; loitering under the shady lee of yonder warehouses will not suffice .
No .
They must get just as nigh the water as they possibly can without falling in .
And there they stand -- miles of them -- leagues .
Inlanders all , they come from lanes and alleys , streets and avenues , -- north , east , south , and west .
Yet here they all unite .
Tell me , does the magnetic virtue of the needles of the compasses of all those ships attract them thither ?
Once more .
Say you are in the country ; in some high land of lakes .
Take almost any path you please , and ten to one it carries you down in a dale , and leaves you there by a pool in the stream .
There is magic in it .
Let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in his deepest reveries -- stand that man on his legs , set his feet a-going , and he will infallibly lead you to water , if water there be in all that region .
Should you ever be athirst in the great American desert , try this experiment , if your caravan happen to be supplied with a metaphysical professor .
Yes , as every one knows , meditation and water are wedded for ever .
But here is an artist .
He desires to paint you the dreamiest , shadiest , quietest , most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all the valley of the Saco .
What is the chief element he employs ?
There stand his trees , each with a hollow trunk , as if a hermit and a crucifix were within ; and here sleeps his meadow , and there sleep his cattle ; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy smoke .
Deep into distant woodlands winds a mazy way , reaching to overlapping spurs of mountains bathed in their hill-side blue .
But though the picture lies thus tranced , and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like leaves upon this shepherd 's head , yet all were vain , unless the shepherd 's eye were fixed upon the magic stream before him .
Go visit the Prairies in June , when for scores on scores of miles you wade knee-deep among Tiger-lilies -- what is the one charm wanting ?
-- Water there is not a drop of water there !
Were Niagara but a cataract of sand , would you travel your thousand miles to see it ?
Why did the poor poet of Tennessee , upon suddenly receiving two handfuls of silver , deliberate whether to buy him a coat , which he sadly needed , or invest his money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway Beach ?
Why is almost every robust healthy boy with a robust healthy soul in him , at some time or other crazy to go to sea ?
Why upon your first voyage as a passenger , did you yourself feel such a mystical vibration , when first told that you and your ship were now out of sight of land ?
Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy ?
Why did the Greeks give it a separate deity , and own brother of Jove ?
Surely all this is not without meaning .
And still deeper the meaning of that story of Narcissus , who because he could not grasp the tormenting , mild image he saw in the fountain , plunged into it and was drowned .
But that same image , we ourselves see in all rivers and oceans .
It is the image of the ungraspable phantom of life ; and this is the key to it all .
Now , when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever I begin to grow hazy about the eyes , and begin to be over conscious of my lungs , I do not mean to have it inferred that I ever go to sea as a passenger .
For to go as a passenger you must needs have a purse , and a purse is but a rag unless you have something in it .
Besides , passengers get sea-sick -- grow quarrelsome -- do n't sleep of nights -- do not enjoy themselves much , as a general thing ; -- no , I never go as a passenger ; nor , though I am something of a salt , do I ever go to sea as a Commodore , or a Captain , or a Cook .
I abandon the glory and distinction of such offices to those who like them .
For my part , I abominate all honorable respectable toils , trials , and tribulations of every kind whatsoever .
It is quite as much as I can do to take care of myself , without taking care of ships , barques , brigs , schooners , and what not .
And as for going as cook , -- though I confess there is considerable glory in that , a cook being a sort of officer on ship-board -- yet , somehow , I never fancied broiling fowls ; -- though once broiled , judiciously buttered , and judgmatically salted and peppered , there is no one who will speak more respectfully , not to say reverentially , of a broiled fowl than I will .
It is out of the idolatrous dotings of the old Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted river horse , that you see the mummies of those creatures in their huge bakehouses the pyramids .
No , when I go to sea , I go as a simple sailor , right before the mast , plumb down into the fore-castle , aloft there to the royal mast-head .
True , they rather order me about some , and make me jump from spar to spar , like a grasshopper in a May meadow .
And at first , this sort of thing is unpleasant enough .
It touches one 's sense of honor , particularly if you come of an old established family in the land , the Van Rensselaers , or Randolphs , or Hardicanutes .
And more than all , if just previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot , you have been lording it as a country schoolmaster , making the tallest boys stand in awe of you .
The transition is a keen one , I assure you , from a schoolmaster to a sailor , and requires a strong decoction of Seneca and the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear it .
But even this wears off in time .
What of it , if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a broom and sweep down the decks ?
What does that indignity amount to , weighed , I mean , in the scales of the New Testament ?
Do you think the archangel Gabriel thinks anything the less of me , because I promptly and respectfully obey that old hunks in that particular instance ?
Who ai n't a slave ?
Tell me that .
Well , then , however the old sea-captains may order me about -- however they may thump and punch me about , I have the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right ; that everybody else is one way or other served in much the same way -- either in a physical or metaphysical point of view , that is ; and so the universal thump is passed round , and all hands should rub each other 's shoulder-blades , and be content .
Again , I always go to sea as a sailor , because they make a point of paying me for my trouble , whereas they never pay passengers a single penny that I ever heard of .
On the contrary , passengers themselves must pay .
And there is all the difference in the world between paying and being paid .
The act of paying is perhaps the most uncomfortable infliction that the two orchard thieves entailed upon us .
But being paid , -- what will compare with it ?
The urbane activity with which a man receives money is really marvellous , considering that we so earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly ills , and that on no account can a monied man enter heaven .
Ah !
how cheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition !
Finally , I always go to sea as a sailor , because of the wholesome exercise and pure air of the fore-castle deck .
For as in this world , head winds are far more prevalent than winds from astern ( that is , if you never violate the Pythagorean maxim ) , so for the most part the Commodore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at second hand from the sailors on the forecastle .
He thinks he breathes it first ; but not so .
In much the same way do the commonalty lead their leaders in many other things , at the same time that the leaders little suspect it .
But wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt the sea as a merchant sailor , I should now take it into my head to go on a whaling voyage ; this the invisible police officer of the Fates , who has the constant surveillance of me , and secretly dogs me , and influences me in some unaccountable way -- he can better answer than any one else .
And , doubtless , my going on this whaling voyage , formed part of the grand programme of Providence that was drawn up a long time ago .
It came in as a sort of brief interlude and solo between more extensive performances .
I take it that this part of the bill must have run something like this :
PART I .
The Wild Land I One January day , thirty years ago , the little town of Hanover , anchored on a windy Nebraska tableland , was trying not to be blown away .
A mist of fine snowflakes was curling and eddying about the cluster of low drab buildings huddled on the gray prairie , under a gray sky .
The dwelling-houses were set about haphazard on the tough prairie sod ; some of them looked as if they had been moved in overnight , and others as if they were straying off by themselves , headed straight for the open plain .
None of them had any appearance of permanence , and the howling wind blew under them as well as over them .
The main street was a deeply rutted road , now frozen hard , which ran from the squat red railway station and the grain “ elevator ” at the north end of the town to the lumber yard and the horse pond at the south end .
On either side of this road straggled two uneven rows of wooden buildings ; the general merchandise stores , the two banks , the drug store , the feed store , the saloon , the post-office .
The board sidewalks were gray with trampled snow , but at two o'clock in the afternoon the shopkeepers , having come back from dinner , were keeping well behind their frosty windows .
The children were all in school , and there was nobody abroad in the streets but a few rough-looking countrymen in coarse overcoats , with their long caps pulled down to their noses .
Some of them had brought their wives to town , and now and then a red or a plaid shawl flashed out of one store into the shelter of another .
At the hitch-bars along the street a few heavy work-horses , harnessed to farm wagons , shivered under their blankets .
About the station everything was quiet , for there would not be another train in until night .
On the sidewalk in front of one of the stores sat a little Swede boy , crying bitterly .
He was about five years old .
His black cloth coat was much too big for him and made him look like a little old man .
His shrunken brown flannel dress had been washed many times and left a long stretch of stocking between the hem of his skirt and the tops of his clumsy , copper-toed shoes .
His cap was pulled down over his ears ; his nose and his chubby cheeks were chapped and red with cold .
He cried quietly , and the few people who hurried by did not notice him .
He was afraid to stop any one , afraid to go into the store and ask for help , so he sat wringing his long sleeves and looking up a telegraph pole beside him , whimpering , “ My kitten , oh , my kitten !
Her will fweeze ! ”
At the top of the pole crouched a shivering gray kitten , mewing faintly and clinging desperately to the wood with her claws .
The boy had been left at the store while his sister went to the doctor 's office , and in her absence a dog had chased his kitten up the pole .
The little creature had never been so high before , and she was too frightened to move .
Her master was sunk in despair .
He was a little country boy , and this village was to him a very strange and perplexing place , where people wore fine clothes and had hard hearts .
He always felt shy and awkward here , and wanted to hide behind things for fear some one might laugh at him .
Just now , he was too unhappy to care who laughed .
At last he seemed to see a ray of hope : his sister was coming , and he got up and ran toward her in his heavy shoes .
His sister was a tall , strong girl , and she walked rapidly and resolutely , as if she knew exactly where she was going and what she was going to do next .
She wore a man 's long ulster ( not as if it were an affliction , but as if it were very comfortable and belonged to her ; carried it like a young soldier ) , and a round plush cap , tied down with a thick veil .
She had a serious , thoughtful face , and her clear , deep blue eyes were fixed intently on the distance , without seeming to see anything , as if she were in trouble .
She did not notice the little boy until he pulled her by the coat .
Then she stopped short and stooped down to wipe his wet face .
“ Why , Emil !
I told you to stay in the store and not to come out .
What is the matter with you ? ”
“ My kitten , sister , my kitten !
A man put her out , and a dog chased her up there . ”
His forefinger , projecting from the sleeve of his coat , pointed up to the wretched little creature on the pole .
“ Oh , Emil !
Did n't I tell you she 'd get us into trouble of some kind , if you brought her ?
What made you tease me so ?
But there , I ought to have known better myself . ”
She went to the foot of the pole and held out her arms , crying , “ Kitty , kitty , kitty , ” but the kitten only mewed and faintly waved its tail .
Alexandra turned away decidedly .
“ No , she wo n't come down .
Somebody will have to go up after her .
I saw the Linstrums ' wagon in town .
I 'll go and see if I can find Carl .
Maybe he can do something .
Only you must stop crying , or I wo n't go a step .
Where 's your comforter ?
Did you leave it in the store ?
Never mind .
Hold still , till I put this on you . ”
She unwound the brown veil from her head and tied it about his throat .
A shabby little traveling man , who was just then coming out of the store on his way to the saloon , stopped and gazed stupidly at the shining mass of hair she bared when she took off her veil ; two thick braids , pinned about her head in the German way , with a fringe of reddish-yellow curls blowing out from under her cap .
He took his cigar out of his mouth and held the wet end between the fingers of his woolen glove .
“ My God , girl , what a head of hair ! ” he exclaimed , quite innocently and foolishly .
She stabbed him with a glance of Amazonian fierceness and drew in her lower lip -- most unnecessary severity .
It gave the little clothing drummer such a start that he actually let his cigar fall to the sidewalk and went off weakly in the teeth of the wind to the saloon .
His hand was still unsteady when he took his glass from the bartender .
His feeble flirtatious instincts had been crushed before , but never so mercilessly .
He felt cheap and ill-used , as if some one had taken advantage of him .
When a drummer had been knocking about in little drab towns and crawling across the wintry country in dirty smoking-cars , was he to be blamed if , when he chanced upon a fine human creature , he suddenly wished himself more of a man ?
While the little drummer was drinking to recover his nerve , Alexandra hurried to the drug store as the most likely place to find Carl Linstrum .
There he was , turning over a portfolio of chromo “ studies ” which the druggist sold to the Hanover women who did china-painting .
Alexandra explained her predicament , and the boy followed her to the corner , where Emil still sat by the pole .
“ I 'll have to go up after her , Alexandra .
I think at the depot they have some spikes I can strap on my feet .
Wait a minute . ”
Carl thrust his hands into his pockets , lowered his head , and darted up the street against the north wind .
He was a tall boy of fifteen , slight and narrow-chested .
When he came back with the spikes , Alexandra asked him what he had done with his overcoat .
“ I left it in the drug store .
I could n't climb in it , anyhow .
Catch me if I fall , Emil , ” he called back as he began his ascent .
Alexandra watched him anxiously ; the cold was bitter enough on the ground .
The kitten would not budge an inch .
Carl had to go to the very top of the pole , and then had some difficulty in tearing her from her hold .
When he reached the ground , he handed the cat to her tearful little master .
“ Now go into the store with her , Emil , and get warm . ”
He opened the door for the child .
“ Wait a minute , Alexandra .
Why ca n't I drive for you as far as our place ?
It 's getting colder every minute .
Have you seen the doctor ? ”
“ Yes .
He is coming over to-morrow .
But he says father ca n't get better ; ca n't get well . ”
The girl 's lip trembled .
She looked fixedly up the bleak street as if she were gathering her strength to face something , as if she were trying with all her might to grasp a situation which , no matter how painful , must be met and dealt with somehow .
The wind flapped the skirts of her heavy coat about her .
Carl did not say anything , but she felt his sympathy .
He , too , was lonely .
He was a thin , frail boy , with brooding dark eyes , very quiet in all his movements .
There was a delicate pallor in his thin face , and his mouth was too sensitive for a boy 's .
The lips had already a little curl of bitterness and skepticism .
The two friends stood for a few moments on the windy street corner , not speaking a word , as two travelers , who have lost their way , sometimes stand and admit their perplexity in silence .
When Carl turned away he said , “ I 'll see to your team . ”
Alexandra went into the store to have her purchases packed in the egg-boxes , and to get warm before she set out on her long cold drive .
When she looked for Emil , she found him sitting on a step of the staircase that led up to the clothing and carpet department .
He was playing with a little Bohemian girl , Marie Tovesky , who was tying her handkerchief over the kitten 's head for a bonnet .
Marie was a stranger in the country , having come from Omaha with her mother to visit her uncle , Joe Tovesky .
She was a dark child , with brown curly hair , like a brunette doll 's , a coaxing little red mouth , and round , yellow-brown eyes .
Every one noticed her eyes ; the brown iris had golden glints that made them look like gold-stone , or , in softer lights , like that Colorado mineral called tiger-eye .
PART ONE Chapter I : The Bertolini “ The Signora had no business to do it , ” said Miss Bartlett , “ no business at all .
She promised us south rooms with a view close together , instead of which here are north rooms , looking into a courtyard , and a long way apart .
Oh , Lucy ! ”
“ And a Cockney , besides ! ”
said Lucy , who had been further saddened by the Signora ’s unexpected accent .
“ It might be London . ”
She looked at the two rows of English people who were sitting at the table ; at the row of white bottles of water and red bottles of wine that ran between the English people ; at the portraits of the late Queen and the late Poet Laureate that hung behind the English people , heavily framed ; at the notice of the English church ( Rev. Cuthbert Eager , M. A. Oxon . )
, that was the only other decoration of the wall .
“ Charlotte , do n’t you feel , too , that we might be in London ?
I can hardly believe that all kinds of other things are just outside .
I suppose it is one ’s being so tired . ”
“ This meat has surely been used for soup , ” said Miss Bartlett , laying down her fork .
“ I want so to see the Arno .
The rooms the Signora promised us in her letter would have looked over the Arno .
The Signora had no business to do it at all .
Oh , it is a shame ! ”
“ Any nook does for me , ” Miss Bartlett continued ; “ but it does seem hard that you should n’t have a view . ”
Lucy felt that she had been selfish .
“ Charlotte , you must n’t spoil me : of course , you must look over the Arno , too .
I meant that .
The first vacant room in the front -- ” “ You must have it , ” said Miss Bartlett , part of whose travelling expenses were paid by Lucy ’s mother -- a piece of generosity to which she made many a tactful allusion .
“ No , no .
You must have it . ”
“ I insist on it .
Your mother would never forgive me , Lucy . ”
“ She would never forgive me . ”
The ladies ’ voices grew animated , and -- if the sad truth be owned -- a little peevish .
They were tired , and under the guise of unselfishness they wrangled .
Some of their neighbours interchanged glances , and one of them -- one of the ill-bred people whom one does meet abroad -- leant forward over the table and actually intruded into their argument .
He said : “ I have a view , I have a view . ”
Miss Bartlett was startled .
Generally at a pension people looked them over for a day or two before speaking , and often did not find out that they would “ do ” till they had gone .
She knew that the intruder was ill-bred , even before she glanced at him .
He was an old man , of heavy build , with a fair , shaven face and large eyes .
There was something childish in those eyes , though it was not the childishness of senility .
What exactly it was Miss Bartlett did not stop to consider , for her glance passed on to his clothes .
These did not attract her .
He was probably trying to become acquainted with them before they got into the swim .
So she assumed a dazed expression when he spoke to her , and then said : “ A view ?
Oh , a view !
How delightful a view is ! ”
“ This is my son , ” said the old man ; “ his name ’s George .
He has a view too . ”
“ Ah , ” said Miss Bartlett , repressing Lucy , who was about to speak .
“ What I mean , ” he continued , “ is that you can have our rooms , and we ’ll have yours .
We ’ll change . ”
The better class of tourist was shocked at this , and sympathized with the new-comers .
Miss Bartlett , in reply , opened her mouth as little as possible , and said “ Thank you very much indeed ; that is out of the question . ”
“ Why ? ”
said the old man , with both fists on the table .
“ Because it is quite out of the question , thank you . ”
“ You see , we do n’t like to take -- ” began Lucy .
Her cousin again repressed her .
“ But why ? ”
he persisted .
“ Women like looking at a view ; men do n’t . ”
And he thumped with his fists like a naughty child , and turned to his son , saying , “ George , persuade them ! ”
“ It ’s so obvious they should have the rooms , ” said the son .
“ There ’s nothing else to say . ”
He did not look at the ladies as he spoke , but his voice was perplexed and sorrowful .
Lucy , too , was perplexed ; but she saw that they were in for what is known as “ quite a scene , ” and she had an odd feeling that whenever these ill-bred tourists spoke the contest widened and deepened till it dealt , not with rooms and views , but with -- well , with something quite different , whose existence she had not realized before .
Now the old man attacked Miss Bartlett almost violently : Why should she not change ?
What possible objection had she ?
They would clear out in half an hour .
Miss Bartlett , though skilled in the delicacies of conversation , was powerless in the presence of brutality .
It was impossible to snub any one so gross .
Her face reddened with displeasure .
She looked around as much as to say , “ Are you all like this ? ”
And two little old ladies , who were sitting further up the table , with shawls hanging over the backs of the chairs , looked back , clearly indicating “ We are not ; we are genteel . ”
“ Eat your dinner , dear , ” she said to Lucy , and began to toy again with the meat that she had once censured .
Lucy mumbled that those seemed very odd people opposite .
“ Eat your dinner , dear .
This pension is a failure .
To-morrow we will make a change . ”
Hardly had she announced this fell decision when she reversed it .
The curtains at the end of the room parted , and revealed a clergyman , stout but attractive , who hurried forward to take his place at the table , cheerfully apologizing for his lateness .
Lucy , who had not yet acquired decency , at once rose to her feet , exclaiming : “ Oh , oh !
Why , it ’s Mr. Beebe !
Oh , how perfectly lovely !
Oh , Charlotte , we must stop now , however bad the rooms are .
Oh ! ”
Miss Bartlett said , with more restraint : “ How do you do , Mr. Beebe ?
I expect that you have forgotten us : Miss Bartlett and Miss Honeychurch , who were at Tunbridge Wells when you helped the Vicar of St. Peter ’s that very cold Easter . ”
The clergyman , who had the air of one on a holiday , did not remember the ladies quite as clearly as they remembered him .
But he came forward pleasantly enough and accepted the chair into which he was beckoned by Lucy .
“ I AM so glad to see you , ” said the girl , who was in a state of spiritual starvation , and would have been glad to see the waiter if her cousin had permitted it .
“ Just fancy how small the world is .
Summer Street , too , makes it so specially funny . ”
“ Miss Honeychurch lives in the parish of Summer Street , ” said Miss Bartlett , filling up the gap , “ and she happened to tell me in the course of conversation that you have just accepted the living -- ” “ Yes , I heard from mother so last week .
She did n’t know that I knew you at Tunbridge Wells ; but I wrote back at once , and I said : ‘ Mr. Beebe is -- ’” “ Quite right , ” said the clergyman .
“ I move into the Rectory at Summer Street next June .
I am lucky to be appointed to such a charming neighbourhood . ”
“ Oh , how glad I am !
The name of our house is Windy Corner . ”
Mr. Beebe bowed .
“ There is mother and me generally , and my brother , though it ’s not often we get him to ch ---- The church is rather far off , I mean . ”
“ Lucy , dearest , let Mr. Beebe eat his dinner . ”
“ I am eating it , thank you , and enjoying it . ”
He preferred to talk to Lucy , whose playing he remembered , rather than to Miss Bartlett , who probably remembered his sermons .
He asked the girl whether she knew Florence well , and was informed at some length that she had never been there before .
It is delightful to advise a newcomer , and he was first in the field .
“ Do n’t neglect the country round , ” his advice concluded .
“ The first fine afternoon drive up to Fiesole , and round by Settignano , or something of that sort . ”
“ No ! ”
cried a voice from the top of the table .
“ Mr. Beebe , you are wrong .
The first fine afternoon your ladies must go to Prato . ”
“ That lady looks so clever , ” whispered Miss Bartlett to her cousin .
“ We are in luck . ”
And , indeed , a perfect torrent of information burst on them .
People told them what to see , when to see it , how to stop the electric trams , how to get rid of the beggars , how much to give for a vellum blotter , how much the place would grow upon them .
The Pension Bertolini had decided , almost enthusiastically , that they would do .
Whichever way they looked , kind ladies smiled and shouted at them .
And above all rose the voice of the clever lady , crying : “ Prato !
They must go to Prato .
That place is too sweetly squalid for words .
I love it ; I revel in shaking off the trammels of respectability , as you know . ”
The young man named George glanced at the clever lady , and then returned moodily to his plate .
Obviously he and his father did not do .
Lucy , in the midst of her success , found time to wish they did .
It gave her no extra pleasure that any one should be left in the cold ; and when she rose to go , she turned back and gave the two outsiders a nervous little bow .
Part I 01 My Early Home The first place that I can well remember was a large pleasant meadow with a pond of clear water in it .
Some shady trees leaned over it , and rushes and water-lilies grew at the deep end .
Over the hedge on one side we looked into a plowed field , and on the other we looked over a gate at our master ’s house , which stood by the roadside ; at the top of the meadow was a grove of fir trees , and at the bottom a running brook overhung by a steep bank .
While I was young I lived upon my mother ’s milk , as I could not eat grass .
In the daytime I ran by her side , and at night I lay down close by her .
When it was hot we used to stand by the pond in the shade of the trees , and when it was cold we had a nice warm shed near the grove .
As soon as I was old enough to eat grass my mother used to go out to work in the daytime , and come back in the evening .
There were six young colts in the meadow besides me ; they were older than I was ; some were nearly as large as grown-up horses .
I used to run with them , and had great fun ; we used to gallop all together round and round the field as hard as we could go .
Sometimes we had rather rough play , for they would frequently bite and kick as well as gallop .
One day , when there was a good deal of kicking , my mother whinnied to me to come to her , and then she said : “ I wish you to pay attention to what I am going to say to you .
The colts who live here are very good colts , but they are cart-horse colts , and of course they have not learned manners .
You have been well-bred and well-born ; your father has a great name in these parts , and your grandfather won the cup two years at the Newmarket races ; your grandmother had the sweetest temper of any horse I ever knew , and I think you have never seen me kick or bite .
I hope you will grow up gentle and good , and never learn bad ways ; do your work with a good will , lift your feet up well when you trot , and never bite or kick even in play . ”
I have never forgotten my mother ’s advice ; I knew she was a wise old horse , and our master thought a great deal of her .
Her name was Duchess , but he often called her Pet .
Our master was a good , kind man .
He gave us good food , good lodging , and kind words ; he spoke as kindly to us as he did to his little children .
We were all fond of him , and my mother loved him very much .
When she saw him at the gate she would neigh with joy , and trot up to him .
He would pat and stroke her and say , “ Well , old Pet , and how is your little Darkie ? ”
I was a dull black , so he called me Darkie ; then he would give me a piece of bread , which was very good , and sometimes he brought a carrot for my mother .
All the horses would come to him , but I think we were his favorites .
My mother always took him to the town on a market day in a light gig .
There was a plowboy , Dick , who sometimes came into our field to pluck blackberries from the hedge .
When he had eaten all he wanted he would have what he called fun with the colts , throwing stones and sticks at them to make them gallop .
We did not much mind him , for we could gallop off ; but sometimes a stone would hit and hurt us .
One day he was at this game , and did not know that the master was in the next field ; but he was there , watching what was going on ; over the hedge he jumped in a snap , and catching Dick by the arm , he gave him such a box on the ear as made him roar with the pain and surprise .
As soon as we saw the master we trotted up nearer to see what went on .
“ Bad boy ! ” he said , “ bad boy !
to chase the colts .
This is not the first time , nor the second , but it shall be the last .
There -- take your money and go home ; I shall not want you on my farm again . ”
So we never saw Dick any more .
Old Daniel , the man who looked after the horses , was just as gentle as our master , so we were well off .
02 The Hunt Before I was two years old a circumstance happened which I have never forgotten .
It was early in the spring ; there had been a little frost in the night , and a light mist still hung over the woods and meadows .
I and the other colts were feeding at the lower part of the field when we heard , quite in the distance , what sounded like the cry of dogs .
The oldest of the colts raised his head , pricked his ears , and said , “ There are the hounds ! ” and immediately cantered off , followed by the rest of us to the upper part of the field , where we could look over the hedge and see several fields beyond .
My mother and an old riding horse of our master ’s were also standing near , and seemed to know all about it .
“ They have found a hare , ” said my mother , “ and if they come this way we shall see the hunt . ”
And soon the dogs were all tearing down the field of young wheat next to ours .
I never heard such a noise as they made .
They did not bark , nor howl , nor whine , but kept on a “ yo !
yo , o , o !
yo !
yo , o , o ! ” at the top of their voices .
After them came a number of men on horseback , some of them in green coats , all galloping as fast as they could .
The old horse snorted and looked eagerly after them , and we young colts wanted to be galloping with them , but they were soon away into the fields lower down ; here it seemed as if they had come to a stand ; the dogs left off barking , and ran about every way with their noses to the ground .
“ They have lost the scent , ” said the old horse ; “ perhaps the hare will get off . ”
“ What hare ? ”
I said .
“ Oh !
I do n’t know what hare ; likely enough it may be one of our own hares out of the woods ; any hare they can find will do for the dogs and men to run after ; ” and before long the dogs began their “ yo !
yo , o , o ! ” again , and back they came altogether at full speed , making straight for our meadow at the part where the high bank and hedge overhang the brook .
“ Now we shall see the hare , ” said my mother ; and just then a hare wild with fright rushed by and made for the woods .
On came the dogs ; they burst over the bank , leaped the stream , and came dashing across the field followed by the huntsmen .
Six or eight men leaped their horses clean over , close upon the dogs .
The hare tried to get through the fence ; it was too thick , and she turned sharp round to make for the road , but it was too late ; the dogs were upon her with their wild cries ; we heard one shriek , and that was the end of her .
One of the huntsmen rode up and whipped off the dogs , who would soon have torn her to pieces .
He held her up by the leg torn and bleeding , and all the gentlemen seemed well pleased .
As for me , I was so astonished that I did not at first see what was going on by the brook ; but when I did look there was a sad sight ; two fine horses were down , one was struggling in the stream , and the other was groaning on the grass .
One of the riders was getting out of the water covered with mud , the other lay quite still .
“ His neck is broke , ” said my mother .
“ And serve him right , too , ” said one of the colts .
I thought the same , but my mother did not join with us .
“ Well , no , ” she said , “ you must not say that ; but though I am an old horse , and have seen and heard a great deal , I never yet could make out why men are so fond of this sport ; they often hurt themselves , often spoil good horses , and tear up the fields , and all for a hare or a fox , or a stag , that they could get more easily some other way ; but we are only horses , and do n’t know . ”
While my mother was saying this we stood and looked on .
Many of the riders had gone to the young man ; but my master , who had been watching what was going on , was the first to raise him .
His head fell back and his arms hung down , and every one looked very serious .
There was no noise now ; even the dogs were quiet , and seemed to know that something was wrong .
They carried him to our master ’s house .
I heard afterward that it was young George Gordon , the squire ’s only son , a fine , tall young man , and the pride of his family .
There was now riding off in all directions to the doctor ’s , to the farrier ’s , and no doubt to Squire Gordon ’s , to let him know about his son .
When Mr. Bond , the farrier , came to look at the black horse that lay groaning on the grass , he felt him all over , and shook his head ; one of his legs was broken .
Then some one ran to our master ’s house and came back with a gun ; presently there was a loud bang and a dreadful shriek , and then all was still ; the black horse moved no more .
My mother seemed much troubled ; she said she had known that horse for years , and that his name was “ Rob Roy ” ; he was a good horse , and there was no vice in him .
She never would go to that part of the field afterward .
PART I I THIS is the saddest story I have ever heard .
We had known the Ashburnhams for nine seasons of the town of Nauheim with an extreme intimacy -- or , rather with an acquaintanceship as loose and easy and yet as close as a good glove 's with your hand .
My wife and I knew Captain and Mrs Ashburnham as well as it was possible to know anybody , and yet , in another sense , we knew nothing at all about them .
This is , I believe , a state of things only possible with English people of whom , till today , when I sit down to puzzle out what I know of this sad affair , I knew nothing whatever .
Six months ago I had never been to England , and , certainly , I had never sounded the depths of an English heart .
I had known the shallows .
I do n't mean to say that we were not acquainted with many English people .
Living , as we perforce lived , in Europe , and being , as we perforce were , leisured Americans , which is as much as to say that we were un-American , we were thrown very much into the society of the nicer English .
Paris , you see , was our home .
Somewhere between Nice and Bordighera provided yearly winter quarters for us , and Nauheim always received us from July to September .
You will gather from this statement that one of us had , as the saying is , a " heart " , and , from the statement that my wife is dead , that she was the sufferer .
Captain Ashburnham also had a heart .
But , whereas a yearly month or so at Nauheim tuned him up to exactly the right pitch for the rest of the twelvemonth , the two months or so were only just enough to keep poor Florence alive from year to year .
The reason for his heart was , approximately , polo , or too much hard sportsmanship in his youth .
The reason for poor Florence 's broken years was a storm at sea upon our first crossing to Europe , and the immediate reasons for our imprisonment in that continent were doctor 's orders .
They said that even the short Channel crossing might well kill the poor thing .
When we all first met , Captain Ashburnham , home on sick leave from an India to which he was never to return , was thirty-three ; Mrs Ashburnham Leonora -- was thirty-one .
I was thirty-six and poor Florence thirty .
Thus today Florence would have been thirty-nine and Captain Ashburnham forty-two ; whereas I am forty-five and Leonora forty .
You will perceive , therefore , that our friendship has been a young-middle-aged affair , since we were all of us of quite quiet dispositions , the Ashburnhams being more particularly what in England it is the custom to call " quite good people " .
They were descended , as you will probably expect , from the Ashburnham who accompanied Charles I to the scaffold , and , as you must also expect with this class of English people , you would never have noticed it .
Mrs Ashburnham was a Powys ; Florence was a Hurlbird of Stamford , Connecticut , where , as you know , they are more old-fashioned than even the inhabitants of Cranford , England , could have been .
I myself am a Dowell of Philadelphia , Pa. , where , it is historically true , there are more old English families than you would find in any six English counties taken together .
I carry about with me , indeed -- as if it were the only thing that invisibly anchored me to any spot upon the globe -- the title deeds of my farm , which once covered several blocks between Chestnut and Walnut Streets .
These title deeds are of wampum , the grant of an Indian chief to the first Dowell , who left Farnham in Surrey in company with William Penn .
Florence 's people , as is so often the case with the inhabitants of Connecticut , came from the neighbourhood of Fordingbridge , where the Ashburnhams ' place is .
From there , at this moment , I am actually writing .
You may well ask why I write .
And yet my reasons are quite many .
For it is not unusual in human beings who have witnessed the sack of a city or the falling to pieces of a people to desire to set down what they have witnessed for the benefit of unknown heirs or of generations infinitely remote ; or , if you please , just to get the sight out of their heads .
Some one has said that the death of a mouse from cancer is the whole sack of Rome by the Goths , and I swear to you that the breaking up of our little four-square coterie was such another unthinkable event .
Supposing that you should come upon us sitting together at one of the little tables in front of the club house , let us say , at Homburg , taking tea of an afternoon and watching the miniature golf , you would have said that , as human affairs go , we were an extraordinarily safe castle .
We were , if you will , one of those tall ships with the white sails upon a blue sea , one of those things that seem the proudest and the safest of all the beautiful and safe things that God has permitted the mind of men to frame .
Where better could one take refuge ?
Where better ?
Permanence ?
Stability ?
I ca n't believe it 's gone .
I ca n't believe that that long , tranquil life , which was just stepping a minuet , vanished in four crashing days at the end of nine years and six weeks .
Upon my word , yes , our intimacy was like a minuet , simply because on every possible occasion and in every possible circumstance we knew where to go , where to sit , which table we unanimously should choose ; and we could rise and go , all four together , without a signal from any one of us , always to the music of the Kur orchestra , always in the temperate sunshine , or , if it rained , in discreet shelters .
No , indeed , it ca n't be gone .
You ca n't kill a minuet de la cour .
You may shut up the music-book , close the harpsichord ; in the cupboard and presses the rats may destroy the white satin favours .
The mob may sack Versailles ; the Trianon may fall , but surely the minuet -- the minuet itself is dancing itself away into the furthest stars , even as our minuet of the Hessian bathing places must be stepping itself still .
Is n't there any heaven where old beautiful dances , old beautiful intimacies prolong themselves ?
Is n't there any Nirvana pervaded by the faint thrilling of instruments that have fallen into the dust of wormwood but that yet had frail , tremulous , and everlasting souls ?
No , by God , it is false !
It was n't a minuet that we stepped ; it was a prison -- a prison full of screaming hysterics , tied down so that they might not outsound the rolling of our carriage wheels as we went along the shaded avenues of the Taunus Wald .
And yet I swear by the sacred name of my creator that it was true .
It was true sunshine ; the true music ; the true splash of the fountains from the mouth of stone dolphins .
For , if for me we were four people with the same tastes , with the same desires , acting -- or , no , not acting -- sitting here and there unanimously , is n't that the truth ?
If for nine years I have possessed a goodly apple that is rotten at the core and discover its rottenness only in nine years and six months less four days , is n't it true to say that for nine years I possessed a goodly apple ?
So it may well be with Edward Ashburnham , with Leonora his wife and with poor dear Florence .
And , if you come to think of it , is n't it a little odd that the physical rottenness of at least two pillars of our four-square house never presented itself to my mind as a menace to its security ?
It does n't so present itself now though the two of them are actually dead .
I do n't know ... .
I know nothing -- nothing in the world -- of the hearts of men .
I only know that I am alone -- horribly alone .
No hearthstone will ever again witness , for me , friendly intercourse .
No smoking-room will ever be other than peopled with incalculable simulacra amidst smoke wreaths .
Yet , in the name of God , what should I know if I do n't know the life of the hearth and of the smoking-room , since my whole life has been passed in those places ?
The warm hearthside !
-- Well , there was Florence : I believe that for the twelve years her life lasted , after the storm that seemed irretrievably to have weakened her heart -- I do n't believe that for one minute she was out of my sight , except when she was safely tucked up in bed and I should be downstairs , talking to some good fellow or other in some lounge or smoking-room or taking my final turn with a cigar before going to bed .
I do n't , you understand , blame Florence .
But how can she have known what she knew ?
How could she have got to know it ?
To know it so fully .
Heavens !
There does n't seem to have been the actual time .
It must have been when I was taking my baths , and my Swedish exercises , being manicured .
Leading the life I did , of the sedulous , strained nurse , I had to do something to keep myself fit .
It must have been then !
Yet even that ca n't have been enough time to get the tremendously long conversations full of worldly wisdom that Leonora has reported to me since their deaths .
And is it possible to imagine that during our prescribed walks in Nauheim and the neighbourhood she found time to carry on the protracted negotiations which she did carry on between Edward Ashburnham and his wife ?
And is n't it incredible that during all that time Edward and Leonora never spoke a word to each other in private ?
What is one to think of humanity ?
For I swear to you that they were the model couple .
He was as devoted as it was possible to be without appearing fatuous .
So well set up , with such honest blue eyes , such a touch of stupidity , such a warm goodheartedness !
And she -- so tall , so splendid in the saddle , so fair !
Yes , Leonora was extraordinarily fair and so extraordinarily the real thing that she seemed too good to be true .
You do n't , I mean , as a rule , get it all so superlatively together .
To be the county family , to look the county family , to be so appropriately and perfectly wealthy ; to be so perfect in manner -- even just to the saving touch of insolence that seems to be necessary .
To have all that and to be all that !
No , it was too good to be true .
And yet , only this afternoon , talking over the whole matter she said to me : " Once I tried to have a lover but I was so sick at the heart , so utterly worn out that I had to send him away . "
That struck me as the most amazing thing I had ever heard .
She said " I was actually in a man 's arms .
Such a nice chap !
Such a dear fellow !
And I was saying to myself , fiercely , hissing it between my teeth , as they say in novels -- and really clenching them together : I was saying to myself : ' Now , I 'm in for it and I 'll really have a good time for once in my life -- for once in my life ! '
It was in the dark , in a carriage , coming back from a hunt ball .
Eleven miles we had to drive !
And then suddenly the bitterness of the endless poverty , of the endless acting -- it fell on me like a blight , it spoilt everything .
Yes , I had to realize that I had been spoilt even for the good time when it came .
And I burst out crying and I cried and I cried for the whole eleven miles .
Just imagine me crying !
And just imagine me making a fool of the poor dear chap like that .
It certainly was n't playing the game , was it now ? "
CHAPTER I DESCRIPTION OF FARMER OAK -- AN INCIDENT When Farmer Oak smiled , the corners of his mouth spread till they were within an unimportant distance of his ears , his eyes were reduced to chinks , and diverging wrinkles appeared round them , extending upon his countenance like the rays in a rudimentary sketch of the rising sun .
His Christian name was Gabriel , and on working days he was a young man of sound judgment , easy motions , proper dress , and general good character .
On Sundays he was a man of misty views , rather given to postponing , and hampered by his best clothes and umbrella : upon the whole , one who felt himself to occupy morally that vast middle space of Laodicean neutrality which lay between the Communion people of the parish and the drunken section , -- that is , he went to church , but yawned privately by the time the con - gegation reached the Nicene creed , - and thought of what there would be for dinner when he meant to be listening to the sermon .
Or , to state his character as it stood in the scale of public opinion , when his friends and critics were in tantrums , he was considered rather a bad man ; when they were pleased , he was rather a good man ; when they were neither , he was a man whose moral colour was a kind of pepper-and-salt mixture .
Since he lived six times as many working-days as Sundays , Oak 's appearance in his old clothes was most peculiarly his own -- the mental picture formed by his neighbours in imagining him being always dressed in that way .
He wore a low-crowned felt hat , spread out at the base by tight jamming upon the head for security in high winds , and a coat like Dr. Johnson 's ; his lower extremities being encased in ordinary leather leggings and boots emphatically large , affording to each foot a roomy apartment so constructed that any wearer might stand in a river all day long and know nothing of damp -- their maker being a conscientious man who endeavoured to compensate for any weakness in his cut by unstinted dimension and solidity .
Mr. Oak carried about him , by way of watch , - what may be called a small silver clock ; in other words , it was a watch as to shape and intention , and a small clock as to size .
This instrument being several years older than Oak 's grandfather , had the peculiarity of going either too fast or not at all .
The smaller of its hands , too , occasionally slipped round on the pivot , and thus , though the minutes were told with precision , nobody could be quite certain of the hour they belonged to .
The stopping peculiarity of his watch Oak remedied by thumps and shakes , and he escaped any evil consequences from the other two defects by constant comparisons with and observations of the sun and stars , and by pressing his face close to the glass of his neighbours ' windows , till he could discern the hour marked by the green-faced timekeepers within .
It may be mentioned that Oak 's fob being difficult of access , by reason of its somewhat high situation in the waistband of his trousers ( which also lay at a remote height under his waistcoat ) , the watch was as a necessity pulled out by throwing the body to one side , compressing the mouth and face to a mere mass of ruddy flesh on account of the exertion , and drawing up the watch by its chain , like a bucket from a well .
But some thoughtfull persons , who had seen him walking across one of his fields on a certain December morning -- sunny and exceedingly mild -- might have regarded Gabriel Oak in other aspects than these .
In his face one might notice that many of the hues and curves of youth had tarried on to manhood : there even remained in his remoter crannies some relics of the boy .
His height and breadth would have been sufficient to make his presence imposing , had they been exhibited with due consideration .
But there is a way some men have , rural and urban alike , for which the mind is more responsible than flesh and sinew : it is a way of curtail - ing their dimensions by their manner of showing them .
And from a quiet modesty that would have become a vestal which seemed continually to impress upon him that he had no great claim on the world 's room , Oak walked unassumingly and with a faintly perceptible bend , yet distinct from a bowing of the shoulders .
This may be said to be a defect in an individual if he depends for his valuation more upon his appearance than upon his capacity to wear well , which Oak did not .
He had just reached the time of life at which " young " is ceasing to be the prefix of " man " in speaking of one .
He was at the brightest period of masculine growth , for his intellect and his emotions were clearly separated : he had passed the time during which the influence of youth indiscriminately mingles them in the character of impulse , and he had not yet arrived at the stage wherein they become united again , in the character of prejudice , by the influence of a wife and family .
In short , he was twenty-eight , and a bachelor .
The field he was in this morning sloped to a ridge called Norcombe Hill .
Through a spur of this hill ran the highway between Emminster and Chalk - Newton .
Casually glancing over the hedge , Oak saw coming down the incline before him an ornamental spring waggon , painted yellow and gaily marked , drawn by two horses , a waggoner walking alongside bearing a whip perpendicularly .
The waggon was laden with household goods and window plants , and on the apex of the whole sat a woman , " young " and attractive .
Gabriel had not beheld the sight for more than half a minute , when the vehicle was brought to a standstill just beneath his eyes .
" The tailboard of the waggon is gone , Miss. " said the waggoner .
" Then I heard it fall . "
said the girl , in a soft , though not particularly low voice .
" I heard a noise I could not account for when we were coming up the hill . "
" I 'll run back . "
" Do . "
she answered .
The sensible horses stood -- perfectly still , and the waggoner 's steps sank fainter and fainter in the distance .
The girl on the summit of the load sat motionless , surrounded by tables and chairs with their legs upwards , backed by an oak settle , and ornamented in front by pots of geraniums , myrtles , and cactuses , together with a caged canary -- all probably from the windows of the house just vacated .
There was also a cat in a willow basket , from the partly-opened lid of which she gazed with half-closed eyes , and affectionately-surveyed the small birds around .
The handsome girl waited for some time idly in her place , and the only sound heard in the stillness was the hopping of the canary up-and down the perches of its prison .
Then she looked attentively downwards .
It was not at the bird , nor at the cat ; it was at an oblong package tied in paper , and lying between them .
She turned her head to learn if the waggoner were coming .
He was not yet in sight ; and her-eyes crept back to the package , her thoughts seeming to run upon what was inside it .
At length she drew the article into her lap , and untied the paper covering ; a small swing looking-glass was disclosed , in which she proceeded to survey herself attentively .
She parted her lips and smiled .
It was a fine morning , and the sun lighted up to a scarlet glow the crimson jacket she wore , and painted a soft lustre upon her bright face and dark hair .
The myrtles , geraniums , and cactuses packed around her were fresh and green , and at such a leafless season they invested the whole concern of horses , waggon , furniture , and girl with a peculiar vernal charm .
What possessed her to indulge in such a performance in the sight of the sparrows , blackbirds , and unperceived farmer who were alone its spectators , -- whether the smile began as a factitious one , to test her capacity in that art , -- nobody knows ; it ended certainly in a real smile .
She blushed at herself , and seeing her reflection blush , blushed the more .
The change from the customary spot and necessary occasion of such an act -- from the dressing hour in a bedroom to a time of travelling out of doors -- lent to the idle deed a novelty it did not intrinsically possess .
The picture was a delicate one .
Woman 's prescriptive infirmity had stalked into the sunlight , which had clothed it in the freshness of an originality .
A cynical inference was irresistible by Gabriel Oak as he regarded the scene , generous though he fain would have been .
There was no necessity whatever for her looking in the glass .
She did not adjust her hat , or pat her hair , or press a dimple into shape , or do one thing to signify that any such intention had been her motive in taking up the glass .
She simply observed herself as a fair product of Nature in the feminine kind , her thoughts seeming to glide into far-off though likely dramas in which men would play a part -- vistas of probable triumphs -- the smiles being of a phase suggesting that hearts were imagined as lost and won .
Still , this was but conjecture , and the whole series of actions was so idly put forth as to make it rash to assert that intention had any part in them at all .
The waggoner 's steps were heard returning .
She put the glass in the paper , and the whole again into its place .
When the waggon had passed on , Gabriel withdrew from his point of espial , and descending into the road , followed the vehicle to the turnpike-gate some way beyond the bottom of the hill , where the object of his contemplation now halted for the payment of toll .
About twenty steps still remained between him and the gate , when he heard a dispute .
lt was a difference con - cerning twopence between the persons with the waggon and the man at the toll-bar .
" Mis ' ess 's niece is upon the top of the things , and she says that 's enough that I 've offered ye , you great miser , and she wo n't pay any more . "
These were the waggoner 's words .
" Very well ; then mis ' ess 's niece ca n't pass . "
said the turnpike-keeper , closing the gate .
Oak looked from one to the other of the disputants , and fell into a reverie .
There was something in the tone of twopence remarkably insignificant .
Threepence had a definite value as money -- it was an appreciable infringement on a day 's wages , and , as such , a higgling matter ; but twopence -- " Here . "
he said , stepping forward and handing twopence to the gatekeeper ; " let the young woman pass . "
He looked up at her then ; she heard his words , and looked down .
Gabriel 's features adhered throughout their form so exactly to the middle line between the beauty of St. John and the ugliness of Judas Iscariot , as represented in a window of the church he attended , that not a single lineament could be selected and called worthy either of distinction or notoriety .
The redjacketed and dark - haired maiden seemed to think so too , for she carelessly glanced over him , and told her man to drive on .
She might have looked her thanks to Gabriel on a minute scale , but she did not speak them ; more probably she felt none , for in gaining her a passage he had lost her her point , and we know how women take a favour of that kind .
The gatekeeper surveyed the retreating vehicle .
" That 's a handsome maid " he said to Oak " But she has her faults . "
said Gabriel .
" True , farmer . "
" And the greatest of them is -- well , what it is always . "
" Beating people down ?
ay , 't is so . "
" O no . "
" What , then ? "
Gabriel , perhaps a little piqued by the comely traveller 's indifference , glanced back to where he had witnessed her performance over the hedge , and said , " Vanity . "
CHAPTER I IN WHICH I THROW AMBS-ACE THE work of the day being over , I sat down upon my doorstep , pipe in hand , to rest awhile in the cool of the evening .
Death is not more still than is this Virginian land in the hour when the sun has sunk away , and it is black beneath the trees , and the stars brighten slowly and softly , one by one .
The birds that sing all day have hushed , and the horned owls , the monster frogs , and that strange and ominous fowl ( if fowl it be , and not , as some assert , a spirit damned ) which we English call the whippoorwill , are yet silent .
Later the wolf will howl and the panther scream , but now there is no sound .
The winds are laid , and the restless leaves droop and are quiet .
The low lap of the water among the reeds is like the breathing of one who sleeps in his watch beside the dead .
I marked the light die from the broad bosom of the river , leaving it a dead man 's hue .
Awhile ago , and for many evenings , it had been crimson , -- a river of blood .
A week before , a great meteor had shot through the night , blood-red and bearded , drawing a slow-fading fiery trail across the heavens ; and the moon had risen that same night blood-red , and upon its disk there was drawn in shadow a thing most marvelously like a scalping knife .
Wherefore , the following day being Sunday , good Mr. Stockham , our minister at Weyanoke , exhorted us to be on our guard , and in his prayer besought that no sedition or rebellion might raise its head amongst the Indian subjects of the Lord 's anointed .
Afterward , in the churchyard , between the services , the more timorous began to tell of divers portents which they had observed , and to recount old tales of how the savages distressed us in the Starving Time .
The bolder spirits laughed them to scorn , but the women began to weep and cower , and I , though I laughed too , thought of Smith , and how he ever held the savages , and more especially that Opechancanough who was now their emperor , in a most deep distrust ; telling us that the red men watched while we slept , that they might teach wiliness to a Jesuit , and how to bide its time to a cat crouched before a mousehole .
I thought of the terms we now kept with these heathen ; of how they came and went familiarly amongst us , spying out our weakness , and losing the salutary awe which that noblest captain had struck into their souls ; of how many were employed as hunters to bring down deer for lazy masters ; of how , breaking the law , and that not secretly , we gave them knives and arms , a soldier 's bread , in exchange for pelts and pearls ; of how their emperor was forever sending us smooth messages ; of how their lips smiled and their eyes frowned .
That afternoon , as I rode home through the lengthening shadows , a hunter , red-brown and naked , rose from behind a fallen tree that sprawled across my path , and made offer to bring me my meat from the moon of corn to the moon of stags in exchange for a gun .
There was scant love between the savages and myself , -- it was answer enough when I told him my name .
I left the dark figure standing , still as a carved stone , in the heavy shadow of the trees , and , spurring my horse ( sent me from home , the year before , by my cousin Percy ) , was soon at my house , -- a poor and rude one , but pleasantly set upon a slope of green turf , and girt with maize and the broad leaves of the tobacco .
When I had had my supper , I called from their hut the two Paspahegh lads bought by me from their tribe the Michaelmas before , and soundly flogged them both , having in my mind a saying of my ancient captain 's , namely , “ He who strikes first oft-times strikes last . ”
Upon the afternoon of which I now speak , in the midsummer of the year of grace 1621 , as I sat upon my doorstep , my long pipe between my teeth and my eyes upon the pallid stream below , my thoughts were busy with these matters , -- so busy that I did not see a horse and rider emerge from the dimness of the forest into the cleared space before my palisade , nor knew , until his voice came up the bank , that my good friend , Master John Rolfe , was without and would speak to me .
I went down to the gate , and , unbarring it , gave him my hand and led the horse within the inclosure .
“ Thou careful man ! ” he said , with a laugh , as he dismounted .
“ Who else , think you , in this or any other hundred , now bars his gate when the sun goes down ? ”
“ It is my sunset gun , ” I answered briefly , fastening his horse as I spoke .
He put his arm about my shoulder , for we were old friends , and together we went up the green bank to the house , and , when I had brought him a pipe , sat down side by side upon the doorstep .
“ Of what were you dreaming ? ” he asked presently , when we had made for ourselves a great cloud of smoke .
“ I called you twice . ”
“ I was wishing for Dale 's times and Dale 's laws . ”
He laughed , and touched my knee with his hand , white and smooth as a woman 's , and with a green jewel upon the forefinger .
“ Thou Mars incarnate ! ” he cried .
“ Thou first , last , and in the meantime soldier !
Why , what wilt thou do when thou gettest to heaven ?
Make it too hot to hold thee ?
Or take out letters of marque against the Enemy ? ”
“ I am not there yet , ” I said dryly .
“ In the meantime I would like a commission against -- your relatives . ”
He laughed , then sighed , and , sinking his chin into his hand and softly tapping his foot against the ground , fell into a reverie .
“ I would your princess were alive , ” I said presently .
“ So do I , ” he answered softly .
“ So do I. ” Locking his hands behind his head , he raised his quiet face to the evening star .
“ Brave and wise and gentle , ” he mused .
“ If I did not think to meet her again , beyond that star , I could not smile and speak calmly , Ralph , as I do now . ”
“ ' T is a strange thing , ” I said , as I refilled my pipe .
“ Love for your brother-in-arms , love for your commander if he be a commander worth having , love for your horse and dog , I understand .
But wedded love !
to tie a burden around one 's neck because ' t is pink and white , or clear bronze , and shaped with elegance !
Faugh ! ”
“ Yet I came with half a mind to persuade thee to that very burden ! ” he cried , with another laugh .
“ Thanks for thy pains , ” I said , blowing blue rings into the air .
“ I have ridden to-day from Jamestown , ” he went on .
“ I was the only man , i ' faith , that cared to leave its gates ; and I met the world -- the bachelor world -- flocking to them .
Not a mile of the way but I encountered Tom , Dick , and Harry , dressed in their Sunday bravery and making full tilt for the city .
And the boats upon the river !
I have seen the Thames less crowded . ”
“ There was more passing than usual , ” I said ; “ but I was busy in the fields , and did not attend .
What 's the lodestar ? ”
“ The star that draws us all , -- some to ruin , some to bliss ineffable , woman . ”
“ Humph !
The maids have come , then ? ”
He nodded .
“ There 's a goodly ship down there , with a goodly lading . ”
“ Videlicet , some fourscore waiting damsels and milkmaids , warranted honest by my Lord Warwick , ” I muttered .
“ This business hath been of Edwyn Sandys ' management , as you very well know , ” he rejoined , with some heat .
“ His word is good : therefore I hold them chaste .
That they are fair I can testify , having seen them leave the ship . ”
“ Fair and chaste , ” I said , “ but meanly born . ”
“ I grant you that , ” he answered .
“ But after all , what of it ?
Beggars must not be choosers .
The land is new and must be peopled , nor will those who come after us look too curiously into the lineage of those to whom a nation owes its birth .
What we in these plantations need is a loosening of the bonds which tie us to home , to England , and a tightening of those which bind us to this land in which we have cast our lot .
We put our hand to the plough , but we turn our heads and look to our Egypt and its fleshpots . '
T is children and wife -- be that wife princess or peasant -- that make home of a desert , that bind a man with chains of gold to the country where they abide .
Wherefore , when at midday I met good Master Wickham rowing down from Henricus to Jamestown , to offer his aid to Master Bucke in his press of business to-morrow , I gave the good man Godspeed , and thought his a fruitful errand and one pleasing to the Lord . ”
“ Amen , ” I yawned .
“ I love the land , and call it home .
My withers are unwrung . ”
He rose to his feet , and began to pace the greensward before the door .
My eyes followed his trim figure , richly though sombrely clad , then fell with a sudden dissatisfaction upon my own stained and frayed apparel .
“ Ralph , ” he said presently , coming to a stand before me , “ have you ever an hundred and twenty pounds of tobacco in hand ?
If not , I ” -- “ I have the weed , ” I replied .
“ What then ? ”
“ Then at dawn drop down with the tide to the city , and secure for thyself one of these same errant damsels . ”
THE SISTERS There was no hope for him this time : it was the third stroke .
Night after night I had passed the house ( it was vacation time ) and studied the lighted square of window : and night after night I had found it lighted in the same way , faintly and evenly .
If he was dead , I thought , I would see the reflection of candles on the darkened blind for I knew that two candles must be set at the head of a corpse .
He had often said to me : “ I am not long for this world , ” and I had thought his words idle .
Now I knew they were true .
Every night as I gazed up at the window I said softly to myself the word paralysis .
It had always sounded strangely in my ears , like the word gnomon in the Euclid and the word simony in the Catechism .
But now it sounded to me like the name of some maleficent and sinful being .
It filled me with fear , and yet I longed to be nearer to it and to look upon its deadly work .
Old Cotter was sitting at the fire , smoking , when I came downstairs to supper .
While my aunt was ladling out my stirabout he said , as if returning to some former remark of his : “ No , I would n’t say he was exactly ... but there was something queer ... there was something uncanny about him .
I ’ll tell you my opinion .... ” He began to puff at his pipe , no doubt arranging his opinion in his mind .
Tiresome old fool !
When we knew him first he used to be rather interesting , talking of faints and worms ; but I soon grew tired of him and his endless stories about the distillery .
“ I have my own theory about it , ” he said .
“ I think it was one of those ... peculiar cases ... .
But it ’s hard to say .... ” He began to puff again at his pipe without giving us his theory .
My uncle saw me staring and said to me : “ Well , so your old friend is gone , you ’ll be sorry to hear . ”
“ Who ? ”
said I. “ Father Flynn . ”
“ Is he dead ? ”
“ Mr Cotter here has just told us .
He was passing by the house . ”
I knew that I was under observation so I continued eating as if the news had not interested me .
My uncle explained to old Cotter .
“ The youngster and he were great friends .
The old chap taught him a great deal , mind you ; and they say he had a great wish for him . ”
“ God have mercy on his soul , ” said my aunt piously .
Old Cotter looked at me for a while .
I felt that his little beady black eyes were examining me but I would not satisfy him by looking up from my plate .
He returned to his pipe and finally spat rudely into the grate .
“ I would n’t like children of mine , ” he said , “ to have too much to say to a man like that . ”
“ How do you mean , Mr Cotter ? ”
asked my aunt .
“ What I mean is , ” said old Cotter , “ it ’s bad for children .
My idea is : let a young lad run about and play with young lads of his own age and not be ... .
Am I right , Jack ? ”
“ That ’s my principle , too , ” said my uncle .
“ Let him learn to box his corner .
That ’s what I ’m always saying to that Rosicrucian there : take exercise .
Why , when I was a nipper every morning of my life I had a cold bath , winter and summer .
And that ’s what stands to me now .
Education is all very fine and large ... .
Mr Cotter might take a pick of that leg mutton , ” he added to my aunt .
“ No , no , not for me , ” said old Cotter .
My aunt brought the dish from the safe and put it on the table .
“ But why do you think it ’s not good for children , Mr Cotter ? ”
she asked .
“ It ’s bad for children , ” said old Cotter , “ because their minds are so impressionable .
When children see things like that , you know , it has an effect .... ” I crammed my mouth with stirabout for fear I might give utterance to my anger .
Tiresome old red-nosed imbecile !
It was late when I fell asleep .
Though I was angry with old Cotter for alluding to me as a child , I puzzled my head to extract meaning from his unfinished sentences .
In the dark of my room I imagined that I saw again the heavy grey face of the paralytic .
I drew the blankets over my head and tried to think of Christmas .
But the grey face still followed me .
It murmured ; and I understood that it desired to confess something .
I felt my soul receding into some pleasant and vicious region ; and there again I found it waiting for me .
It began to confess to me in a murmuring voice and I wondered why it smiled continually and why the lips were so moist with spittle .
But then I remembered that it had died of paralysis and I felt that I too was smiling feebly as if to absolve the simoniac of his sin .
The next morning after breakfast I went down to look at the little house in Great Britain Street .
It was an unassuming shop , registered under the vague name of Drapery .
The drapery consisted mainly of children ’s bootees and umbrellas ; and on ordinary days a notice used to hang in the window , saying : Umbrellas Re-covered .
No notice was visible now for the shutters were up .
A crape bouquet was tied to the door-knocker with ribbon .
Two poor women and a telegram boy were reading the card pinned on the crape .
I also approached and read : July 1st , 1895 The Rev. James Flynn ( formerly of S. Catherine ’s Church , Meath Street ) , aged sixty-five years .
R. I. P .
The reading of the card persuaded me that he was dead and I was disturbed to find myself at check .
Had he not been dead I would have gone into the little dark room behind the shop to find him sitting in his arm-chair by the fire , nearly smothered in his great-coat .
Perhaps my aunt would have given me a packet of High Toast for him and this present would have roused him from his stupefied doze .
It was always I who emptied the packet into his black snuff-box for his hands trembled too much to allow him to do this without spilling half the snuff about the floor .
Even as he raised his large trembling hand to his nose little clouds of smoke dribbled through his fingers over the front of his coat .
It may have been these constant showers of snuff which gave his ancient priestly garments their green faded look for the red handkerchief , blackened , as it always was , with the snuff-stains of a week , with which he tried to brush away the fallen grains , was quite inefficacious .
I wished to go in and look at him but I had not the courage to knock .
I walked away slowly along the sunny side of the street , reading all the theatrical advertisements in the shop-windows as I went .
I found it strange that neither I nor the day seemed in a mourning mood and I felt even annoyed at discovering in myself a sensation of freedom as if I had been freed from something by his death .
I wondered at this for , as my uncle had said the night before , he had taught me a great deal .
He had studied in the Irish college in Rome and he had taught me to pronounce Latin properly .
He had told me stories about the catacombs and about Napoleon Bonaparte , and he had explained to me the meaning of the different ceremonies of the Mass and of the different vestments worn by the priest .
Sometimes he had amused himself by putting difficult questions to me , asking me what one should do in certain circumstances or whether such and such sins were mortal or venial or only imperfections .
His questions showed me how complex and mysterious were certain institutions of the Church which I had always regarded as the simplest acts .
The duties of the priest towards the Eucharist and towards the secrecy of the confessional seemed so grave to me that I wondered how anybody had ever found in himself the courage to undertake them ; and I was not surprised when he told me that the fathers of the Church had written books as thick as the Post Office Directory and as closely printed as the law notices in the newspaper , elucidating all these intricate questions .
Often when I thought of this I could make no answer or only a very foolish and halting one upon which he used to smile and nod his head twice or thrice .
Sometimes he used to put me through the responses of the Mass which he had made me learn by heart ; and , as I pattered , he used to smile pensively and nod his head , now and then pushing huge pinches of snuff up each nostril alternately .
When he smiled he used to uncover his big discoloured teeth and let his tongue lie upon his lower lip — a habit which had made me feel uneasy in the beginning of our acquaintance before I knew him well .
As I walked along in the sun I remembered old Cotter ’s words and tried to remember what had happened afterwards in the dream .
I remembered that I had noticed long velvet curtains and a swinging lamp of antique fashion .
I felt that I had been very far away , in some land where the customs were strange — in Persia , I thought ... .
But I could not remember the end of the dream .
In the evening my aunt took me with her to visit the house of mourning .
It was after sunset ; but the window-panes of the houses that looked to the west reflected the tawny gold of a great bank of clouds .
Nannie received us in the hall ; and , as it would have been unseemly to have shouted at her , my aunt shook hands with her for all .
The old woman pointed upwards interrogatively and , on my aunt ’s nodding , proceeded to toil up the narrow staircase before us , her bowed head being scarcely above the level of the banister-rail .
At the first landing she stopped and beckoned us forward encouragingly towards the open door of the dead-room .
My aunt went in and the old woman , seeing that I hesitated to enter , began to beckon to me again repeatedly with her hand .
Chapter 1 .
Mr. Sherlock Holmes Mr. Sherlock Holmes , who was usually very late in the mornings , save upon those not infrequent occasions when he was up all night , was seated at the breakfast table .
I stood upon the hearth-rug and picked up the stick which our visitor had left behind him the night before .
It was a fine , thick piece of wood , bulbous-headed , of the sort which is known as a “ Penang lawyer . ”
Just under the head was a broad silver band nearly an inch across .
“ To James Mortimer , M.R.C.S. , from his friends of the C.C.H. , ” was engraved upon it , with the date “ 1884 . ”
It was just such a stick as the old-fashioned family practitioner used to carry -- dignified , solid , and reassuring .
“ Well , Watson , what do you make of it ? ”
Holmes was sitting with his back to me , and I had given him no sign of my occupation .
“ How did you know what I was doing ?
I believe you have eyes in the back of your head . ”
“ I have , at least , a well-polished , silver-plated coffee-pot in front of me , ” said he .
“ But , tell me , Watson , what do you make of our visitor ’s stick ?
Since we have been so unfortunate as to miss him and have no notion of his errand , this accidental souvenir becomes of importance .
Let me hear you reconstruct the man by an examination of it . ”
“ I think , ” said I , following as far as I could the methods of my companion , “ that Dr. Mortimer is a successful , elderly medical man , well-esteemed since those who know him give him this mark of their appreciation . ”
“ Good ! ” said Holmes .
“ Excellent ! ”
“ I think also that the probability is in favour of his being a country practitioner who does a great deal of his visiting on foot . ”
“ Why so ? ”
“ Because this stick , though originally a very handsome one has been so knocked about that I can hardly imagine a town practitioner carrying it .
The thick-iron ferrule is worn down , so it is evident that he has done a great amount of walking with it . ”
“ Perfectly sound ! ” said Holmes .
“ And then again , there is the ‘ friends of the C.C.H. ’ I should guess that to be the Something Hunt , the local hunt to whose members he has possibly given some surgical assistance , and which has made him a small presentation in return . ”
“ Really , Watson , you excel yourself , ” said Holmes , pushing back his chair and lighting a cigarette .
“ I am bound to say that in all the accounts which you have been so good as to give of my own small achievements you have habitually underrated your own abilities .
It may be that you are not yourself luminous , but you are a conductor of light .
Some people without possessing genius have a remarkable power of stimulating it .
I confess , my dear fellow , that I am very much in your debt . ”
He had never said as much before , and I must admit that his words gave me keen pleasure , for I had often been piqued by his indifference to my admiration and to the attempts which I had made to give publicity to his methods .
I was proud , too , to think that I had so far mastered his system as to apply it in a way which earned his approval .
He now took the stick from my hands and examined it for a few minutes with his naked eyes .
Then with an expression of interest he laid down his cigarette , and carrying the cane to the window , he looked over it again with a convex lens .
“ Interesting , though elementary , ” said he as he returned to his favourite corner of the settee .
“ There are certainly one or two indications upon the stick .
It gives us the basis for several deductions . ”
“ Has anything escaped me ? ”
I asked with some self-importance .
“ I trust that there is nothing of consequence which I have overlooked ? ”
“ I am afraid , my dear Watson , that most of your conclusions were erroneous .
When I said that you stimulated me I meant , to be frank , that in noting your fallacies I was occasionally guided towards the truth .
Not that you are entirely wrong in this instance .
The man is certainly a country practitioner .
And he walks a good deal . ”
“ Then I was right . ”
“ To that extent . ”
“ But that was all . ”
“ No , no , my dear Watson , not all -- by no means all .
I would suggest , for example , that a presentation to a doctor is more likely to come from a hospital than from a hunt , and that when the initials ‘ C.C. ’ are placed before that hospital the words ‘ Charing Cross ’ very naturally suggest themselves . ”
“ You may be right . ”
“ The probability lies in that direction .
And if we take this as a working hypothesis we have a fresh basis from which to start our construction of this unknown visitor . ”
“ Well , then , supposing that ‘ C.C.H. ’ does stand for ‘ Charing Cross Hospital , ’ what further inferences may we draw ? ”
“ Do none suggest themselves ?
You know my methods .
Apply them ! ”
“ I can only think of the obvious conclusion that the man has practised in town before going to the country . ”
“ I think that we might venture a little farther than this .
Look at it in this light .
On what occasion would it be most probable that such a presentation would be made ?
When would his friends unite to give him a pledge of their good will ?
Obviously at the moment when Dr. Mortimer withdrew from the service of the hospital in order to start a practice for himself .
We know there has been a presentation .
We believe there has been a change from a town hospital to a country practice .
Is it , then , stretching our inference too far to say that the presentation was on the occasion of the change ? ”
“ It certainly seems probable . ”
“ Now , you will observe that he could not have been on the staff of the hospital , since only a man well-established in a London practice could hold such a position , and such a one would not drift into the country .
What was he , then ?
If he was in the hospital and yet not on the staff he could only have been a house-surgeon or a house-physician -- little more than a senior student .
And he left five years ago -- the date is on the stick .
So your grave , middle-aged family practitioner vanishes into thin air , my dear Watson , and there emerges a young fellow under thirty , amiable , unambitious , absent-minded , and the possessor of a favourite dog , which I should describe roughly as being larger than a terrier and smaller than a mastiff . ”
I laughed incredulously as Sherlock Holmes leaned back in his settee and blew little wavering rings of smoke up to the ceiling .
“ As to the latter part , I have no means of checking you , ” said I , “ but at least it is not difficult to find out a few particulars about the man ’s age and professional career . ”
From my small medical shelf I took down the Medical Directory and turned up the name .
There were several Mortimers , but only one who could be our visitor .
I read his record aloud .
“ Mortimer , James , M.R.C.S. , 1882 , Grimpen , Dartmoor , Devon .
House-surgeon , from 1882 to 1884 , at Charing Cross Hospital .
Winner of the Jackson prize for Comparative Pathology , with essay entitled ‘ Is Disease a Reversion ? ’
Corresponding member of the Swedish Pathological Society .
Author of ‘ Some Freaks of Atavism ’ ( Lancet 1882 ) .
‘ Do We Progress ? ’
( Journal of Psychology , March , 1883 ) .
Medical Officer for the parishes of Grimpen , Thorsley , and High Barrow . ”
“ No mention of that local hunt , Watson , ” said Holmes with a mischievous smile , “ but a country doctor , as you very astutely observed .
I think that I am fairly justified in my inferences .
As to the adjectives , I said , if I remember right , amiable , unambitious , and absent-minded .
It is my experience that it is only an amiable man in this world who receives testimonials , only an unambitious one who abandons a London career for the country , and only an absent-minded one who leaves his stick and not his visiting-card after waiting an hour in your room . ”
“ And the dog ? ”
“ Has been in the habit of carrying this stick behind his master .
Being a heavy stick the dog has held it tightly by the middle , and the marks of his teeth are very plainly visible .
The dog ’s jaw , as shown in the space between these marks , is too broad in my opinion for a terrier and not broad enough for a mastiff .
It may have been -- yes , by Jove , it is a curly-haired spaniel . ”
He had risen and paced the room as he spoke .
Now he halted in the recess of the window .
There was such a ring of conviction in his voice that I glanced up in surprise .
“ My dear fellow , how can you possibly be so sure of that ? ”
“ For the very simple reason that I see the dog himself on our very door-step , and there is the ring of its owner .
Do n’t move , I beg you , Watson .
He is a professional brother of yours , and your presence may be of assistance to me .
Now is the dramatic moment of fate , Watson , when you hear a step upon the stair which is walking into your life , and you know not whether for good or ill .
What does Dr. James Mortimer , the man of science , ask of Sherlock Holmes , the specialist in crime ?
Come in ! ”
The appearance of our visitor was a surprise to me , since I had expected a typical country practitioner .
He was a very tall , thin man , with a long nose like a beak , which jutted out between two keen , gray eyes , set closely together and sparkling brightly from behind a pair of gold-rimmed glasses .
He was clad in a professional but rather slovenly fashion , for his frock-coat was dingy and his trousers frayed .
Though young , his long back was already bowed , and he walked with a forward thrust of his head and a general air of peering benevolence .
As he entered his eyes fell upon the stick in Holmes ’s hand , and he ran towards it with an exclamation of joy .
“ I am so very glad , ” said he .
“ I was not sure whether I had left it here or in the Shipping Office .
I would not lose that stick for the world . ”
Chapter 1 One may as well begin with Helen 's letters to her sister .
HOWARDS END , TUESDAY .
Dearest Meg , It is n't going to be what we expected .
It is old and little , and altogether delightful -- red brick .
We can scarcely pack in as it is , and the dear knows what will happen when Paul ( younger son ) arrives tomorrow .
From hall you go right or left into dining-room or drawing-room .
Hall itself is practically a room .
You open another door in it , and there are the stairs going up in a sort of tunnel to the first-floor .
Three bedrooms in a row there , and three attics in a row above .
That is n't all the house really , but it 's all that one notices -- nine windows as you look up from the front garden .
Then there 's a very big wych-elm -- to the left as you look up -- leaning a little over the house , and standing on the boundary between the garden and meadow .
I quite love that tree already .
Also ordinary elms , oaks -- no nastier than ordinary oaks -- pear-trees , apple-trees , and a vine .
No silver birches , though .
However , I must get on to my host and hostess .
I only wanted to show that it is n't the least what we expected .
Why did we settle that their house would be all gables and wiggles , and their garden all gamboge-coloured paths ?
I believe simply because we associate them with expensive hotels -- Mrs. Wilcox trailing in beautiful dresses down long corridors , Mr. Wilcox bullying porters , etc .
We females are that unjust .
I shall be back Saturday ; will let you know train later .
They are as angry as I am that you did not come too ; really Tibby is too tiresome , he starts a new mortal disease every month .
How could he have got hay fever in London ?
and even if he could , it seems hard that you should give up a visit to hear a schoolboy sneeze .
Tell him that Charles Wilcox ( the son who is here ) has hay fever too , but he 's brave , and gets quite cross when we inquire after it .
Men like the Wilcoxes would do Tibby a power of good .
But you wo n't agree , and I 'd better change the subject .
This long letter is because I 'm writing before breakfast .
Oh , the beautiful vine leaves !
The house is covered with a vine .
I looked out earlier , and Mrs. Wilcox was already in the garden .
She evidently loves it .
No wonder she sometimes looks tired .
She was watching the large red poppies come out .
Then she walked off the lawn to the meadow , whose corner to the right I can just see .
Trail , trail , went her long dress over the sopping grass , and she came back with her hands full of the hay that was cut yesterday -- I suppose for rabbits or something , as she kept on smelling it .
The air here is delicious .
Later on I heard the noise of croquet balls , and looked out again , and it was Charles Wilcox practising ; they are keen on all games .
Presently he started sneezing and had to stop .
Then I hear more clicketing , and it is Mr. Wilcox practising , and then , ' a-tissue , a-tissue ' : he has to stop too .
Then Evie comes out , and does some calisthenic exercises on a machine that is tacked on to a greengage-tree -- they put everything to use -- and then she says ' a-tissue , ' and in she goes .
And finally Mrs. Wilcox reappears , trail , trail , still smelling hay and looking at the flowers .
I inflict all this on you because once you said that life is sometimes life and sometimes only a drama , and one must learn to distinguish t ' other from which , and up to now I have always put that down as ' Meg 's clever nonsense . '
But this morning , it really does seem not life but a play , and it did amuse me enormously to watch the W 's .
Now Mrs. Wilcox has come in .
I am going to wear [ omission ] .
Last night Mrs. Wilcox wore an [ omission ] , and Evie [ omission ] .
So it is n't exactly a go-as-you-please place , and if you shut your eyes it still seems the wiggly hotel that we expected .
Not if you open them .
The dog-roses are too sweet .
There is a great hedge of them over the lawn -- magnificently tall , so that they fall down in garlands , and nice and thin at the bottom , so that you can see ducks through it and a cow .
These belong to the farm , which is the only house near us .
There goes the breakfast gong .
Much love .
Modified love to Tibby .
Love to Aunt Juley ; how good of her to come and keep you company , but what a bore .
Burn this .
Will write again Thursday .
Helen HOWARDS END , FRIDAY .
Dearest Meg , I am having a glorious time .
I like them all .
Mrs. Wilcox , if quieter than in Germany , is sweeter than ever , and I never saw anything like her steady unselfishness , and the best of it is that the others do not take advantage of her .
They are the very happiest , jolliest family that you can imagine .
I do really feel that we are making friends .
The fun of it is that they think me a noodle , and say so -- at least Mr. Wilcox does -- and when that happens , and one does n't mind , it 's a pretty sure test , is n't it ?
He says the most horrid things about women 's suffrage so nicely , and when I said I believed in equality he just folded his arms and gave me such a setting down as I 've never had .
Meg , shall we ever learn to talk less ?
I never felt so ashamed of myself in my life .
I could n't point to a time when men had been equal , nor even to a time when the wish to be equal had made them happier in other ways .
I could n't say a word .
I had just picked up the notion that equality is good from some book -- probably from poetry , or you .
Anyhow , it 's been knocked into pieces , and , like all people who are really strong , Mr. Wilcox did it without hurting me .
On the other hand , I laugh at them for catching hay fever .
We live like fighting-cocks , and Charles takes us out every day in the motor -- a tomb with trees in it , a hermit 's house , a wonderful road that was made by the Kings of Mercia -- tennis -- a cricket match -- bridge -- and at night we squeeze up in this lovely house .
The whole clan 's here now -- it 's like a rabbit warren .
Evie is a dear .
They want me to stop over Sunday -- I suppose it wo n't matter if I do .
Marvellous weather and the view 's marvellous -- views westward to the high ground .
Thank you for your letter .
Burn this .
Your affectionate Helen HOWARDS END , SUNDAY .
Dearest , dearest Meg , -- I do not know what you will say : Paul and I are in love -- the younger son who only came here Wednesday .
Chapter 2 Margaret glanced at her sister 's note and pushed it over the breakfast-table to her aunt .
There was a moment 's hush , and then the flood-gates opened .
" I can tell you nothing , Aunt Juley .
I know no more than you do .
We met -- we only met the father and mother abroad last spring .
I know so little that I did n't even know their son 's name .
It 's all so -- " She waved her hand and laughed a little .
" In that case it is far too sudden . "
" Who knows , Aunt Juley , who knows ? "
" But , Margaret dear , I mean we must n't be unpractical now that we 've come to facts .
It is too sudden , surely . "
" Who knows ! "
" But Margaret dear -- " " I 'll go for her other letters , " said Margaret .
" No , I wo n't , I 'll finish my breakfast .
In fact , I have n't them .
We met the Wilcoxes on an awful expedition that we made from Heidelberg to Speyer .
Helen and I had got it into our heads that there was a grand old cathedral at Speyer -- the Archbishop of Speyer was one of the seven electors -- you know -- ' Speyer , Maintz , and Koln . '
Those three sees once commanded the Rhine Valley and got it the name of Priest Street . "
" I still feel quite uneasy about this business , Margaret . "
" The train crossed by a bridge of boats , and at first sight it looked quite fine .
But oh , in five minutes we had seen the whole thing .
The cathedral had been ruined , absolutely ruined , by restoration ; not an inch left of the original structure .
We wasted a whole day , and came across the Wilcoxes as we were eating our sandwiches in the public gardens .
They too , poor things , had been taken in -- they were actually stopping at Speyer -- and they rather liked Helen insisting that they must fly with us to Heidelberg .
As a matter of fact , they did come on next day .
We all took some drives together .
They knew us well enough to ask Helen to come and see them -- at least , I was asked too , but Tibby 's illness prevented me , so last Monday she went alone .
That 's all .
You know as much as I do now .
It 's a young man out the unknown .
She was to have come back Saturday , but put off till Monday , perhaps on account of -- I do n't know .
She broke off , and listened to the sounds of a London morning .
Their house was in Wickham Place , and fairly quiet , for a lofty promontory of buildings separated it from the main thoroughfare .
One had the sense of a backwater , or rather of an estuary , whose waters flowed in from the invisible sea , and ebbed into a profound silence while the waves without were still beating .
Though the promontory consisted of flats -- expensive , with cavernous entrance halls , full of concierges and palms -- it fulfilled its purpose , and gained for the older houses opposite a certain measure of peace .
These , too , would be swept away in time , and another promontory would rise upon their site , as humanity piled itself higher and higher on the precious soil of London .
VOLUME 1 CHAPTER I home is the resort Of love , of joy , of peace and plenty , where , Supporting and supported , polish 'd friends And dear relations mingle into bliss .
* * Thomson On the pleasant banks of the Garonne , in the province of Gascony , stood , in the year 1584 , the chateau of Monsieur St. Aubert .
From its windows were seen the pastoral landscapes of Guienne and Gascony stretching along the river , gay with luxuriant woods and vine , and plantations of olives .
To the south , the view was bounded by the majestic Pyrenees , whose summits , veiled in clouds , or exhibiting awful forms , seen , and lost again , as the partial vapours rolled along , were sometimes barren , and gleamed through the blue tinge of air , and sometimes frowned with forests of gloomy pine , that swept downward to their base .
These tremendous precipices were contrasted by the soft green of the pastures and woods that hung upon their skirts ; among whose flocks , and herds , and simple cottages , the eye , after having scaled the cliffs above , delighted to repose .
To the north , and to the east , the plains of Guienne and Languedoc were lost in the mist of distance ; on the west , Gascony was bounded by the waters of Biscay .
M. St. Aubert loved to wander , with his wife and daughter , on the margin of the Garonne , and to listen to the music that floated on its waves .
He had known life in other forms than those of pastoral simplicity , having mingled in the gay and in the busy scenes of the world ; but the flattering portrait of mankind , which his heart had delineated in early youth , his experience had too sorrowfully corrected .
Yet , amidst the changing visions of life , his principles remained unshaken , his benevolence unchilled ; and he retired from the multitude ' more in PITY than in anger , ' to scenes of simple nature , to the pure delights of literature , and to the exercise of domestic virtues .
He was a descendant from the younger branch of an illustrious family , and it was designed , that the deficiency of his patrimonial wealth should be supplied either by a splendid alliance in marriage , or by success in the intrigues of public affairs .
But St. Aubert had too nice a sense of honour to fulfil the latter hope , and too small a portion of ambition to sacrifice what he called happiness , to the attainment of wealth .
After the death of his father he married a very amiable woman , his equal in birth , and not his superior in fortune .
The late Monsieur St. Aubert 's liberality , or extravagance , had so much involved his affairs , that his son found it necessary to dispose of a part of the family domain , and , some years after his marriage , he sold it to Monsieur Quesnel , the brother of his wife , and retired to a small estate in Gascony , where conjugal felicity , and parental duties , divided his attention with the treasures of knowledge and the illuminations of genius .
To this spot he had been attached from his infancy .
He had often made excursions to it when a boy , and the impressions of delight given to his mind by the homely kindness of the grey-headed peasant , to whom it was intrusted , and whose fruit and cream never failed , had not been obliterated by succeeding circumstances .
The green pastures along which he had so often bounded in the exultation of health , and youthful freedom -- the woods , under whose refreshing shade he had first indulged that pensive melancholy , which afterwards made a strong feature of his character -- the wild walks of the mountains , the river , on whose waves he had floated , and the distant plains , which seemed boundless as his early hopes -- were never after remembered by St. Aubert but with enthusiasm and regret .
At length he disengaged himself from the world , and retired hither , to realize the wishes of many years .
The building , as it then stood , was merely a summer cottage , rendered interesting to a stranger by its neat simplicity , or the beauty of the surrounding scene ; and considerable additions were necessary to make it a comfortable family residence .
St. Aubert felt a kind of affection for every part of the fabric , which he remembered in his youth , and would not suffer a stone of it to be removed , so that the new building , adapted to the style of the old one , formed with it only a simple and elegant residence .
The taste of Madame St. Aubert was conspicuous in its internal finishing , where the same chaste simplicity was observable in the furniture , and in the few ornaments of the apartments , that characterized the manners of its inhabitants .
The library occupied the west side of the chateau , and was enriched by a collection of the best books in the ancient and modern languages .
This room opened upon a grove , which stood on the brow of a gentle declivity , that fell towards the river , and the tall trees gave it a melancholy and pleasing shade ; while from the windows the eye caught , beneath the spreading branches , the gay and luxuriant landscape stretching to the west , and overlooked on the left by the bold precipices of the Pyrenees .
Adjoining the library was a green-house , stored with scarce and beautiful plants ; for one of the amusements of St. Aubert was the study of botany , and among the neighbouring mountains , which afforded a luxurious feast to the mind of the naturalist , he often passed the day in the pursuit of his favourite science .
He was sometimes accompanied in these little excursions by Madame St. Aubert , and frequently by his daughter ; when , with a small osier basket to receive plants , and another filled with cold refreshments , such as the cabin of the shepherd did not afford , they wandered away among the most romantic and magnificent scenes , nor suffered the charms of Nature 's lowly children to abstract them from the observance of her stupendous works .
When weary of sauntering among cliffs that seemed scarcely accessible but to the steps of the enthusiast , and where no track appeared on the vegetation , but what the foot of the izard had left ; they would seek one of those green recesses , which so beautifully adorn the bosom of these mountains , where , under the shade of the lofty larch , or cedar , they enjoyed their simple repast , made sweeter by the waters of the cool stream , that crept along the turf , and by the breath of wild flowers and aromatic plants , that fringed the rocks , and inlaid the grass .
Adjoining the eastern side of the green-house , looking towards the plains of Languedoc , was a room , which Emily called hers , and which contained her books , her drawings , her musical instruments , with some favourite birds and plants .
Here she usually exercised herself in elegant arts , cultivated only because they were congenial to her taste , and in which native genius , assisted by the instructions of Monsieur and Madame St. Aubert , made her an early proficient .
The windows of this room were particularly pleasant ; they descended to the floor , and , opening upon the little lawn that surrounded the house , the eye was led between groves of almond , palm-trees , flowering-ash , and myrtle , to the distant landscape , where the Garonne wandered .
The peasants of this gay climate were often seen on an evening , when the day 's labour was done , dancing in groups on the margin of the river .
Their sprightly melodies , debonnaire steps , the fanciful figure of their dances , with the tasteful and capricious manner in which the girls adjusted their simple dress , gave a character to the scene entirely French .
The front of the chateau , which , having a southern aspect , opened upon the grandeur of the mountains , was occupied on the ground floor by a rustic hall , and two excellent sitting rooms .
The first floor , for the cottage had no second story , was laid out in bed-chambers , except one apartment that opened to a balcony , and which was generally used for a breakfast-room .
In the surrounding ground , St. Aubert had made very tasteful improvements ; yet , such was his attachment to objects he had remembered from his boyish days , that he had in some instances sacrificed taste to sentiment .
There were two old larches that shaded the building , and interrupted the prospect ; St. Aubert had sometimes declared that he believed he should have been weak enough to have wept at their fall .
In addition to these larches he planted a little grove of beech , pine , and mountain-ash .
On a lofty terrace , formed by the swelling bank of the river , rose a plantation of orange , lemon , and palm-trees , whose fruit , in the coolness of evening , breathed delicious fragrance .
With these were mingled a few trees of other species .
Here , under the ample shade of a plane-tree , that spread its majestic canopy towards the river , St. Aubert loved to sit in the fine evenings of summer , with his wife and children , watching , beneath its foliage , the setting sun , the mild splendour of its light fading from the distant landscape , till the shadows of twilight melted its various features into one tint of sober grey .
Here , too , he loved to read , and to converse with Madame St. Aubert ; or to play with his children , resigning himself to the influence of those sweet affections , which are ever attendant on simplicity and nature .
He has often said , while tears of pleasure trembled in his eyes , that these were moments infinitely more delightful than any passed amid the brilliant and tumultuous scenes that are courted by the world .
His heart was occupied ; it had , what can be so rarely said , no wish for a happiness beyond what it experienced .
The consciousness of acting right diffused a serenity over his manners , which nothing else could impart to a man of moral perceptions like his , and which refined his sense of every surrounding blessing .
The deepest shade of twilight did not send him from his favourite plane-tree .
He loved the soothing hour , when the last tints of light die away ; when the stars , one by one , tremble through aether , and are reflected on the dark mirror of the waters ; that hour , which , of all others , inspires the mind with pensive tenderness , and often elevates it to sublime contemplation .
When the moon shed her soft rays among the foliage , he still lingered , and his pastoral supper of cream and fruits was often spread beneath it .
Then , on the stillness of night , came the song of the nightingale , breathing sweetness , and awakening melancholy .
CHAPTER 1 .
A Not Unnatural Enterprise This is written from memory , unfortunately .
If I could have brought with me the material I so carefully prepared , this would be a very different story .
Whole books full of notes , carefully copied records , firsthand descriptions , and the pictures -- that ’s the worst loss .
We had some bird ’s - eyes of the cities and parks ; a lot of lovely views of streets , of buildings , outside and in , and some of those gorgeous gardens , and , most important of all , of the women themselves .
Nobody will ever believe how they looked .
Descriptions are n’t any good when it comes to women , and I never was good at descriptions anyhow .
But it ’s got to be done somehow ; the rest of the world needs to know about that country .
I have n’t said where it was for fear some self-appointed missionaries , or traders , or land-greedy expansionists , will take it upon themselves to push in .
They will not be wanted , I can tell them that , and will fare worse than we did if they do find it .
It began this way .
There were three of us , classmates and friends -- Terry O. Nicholson ( we used to call him the Old Nick , with good reason ) , Jeff Margrave , and I , Vandyck Jennings .
We had known each other years and years , and in spite of our differences we had a good deal in common .
All of us were interested in science .
Terry was rich enough to do as he pleased .
His great aim was exploration .
He used to make all kinds of a row because there was nothing left to explore now , only patchwork and filling in , he said .
He filled in well enough -- he had a lot of talents -- great on mechanics and electricity .
Had all kinds of boats and motorcars , and was one of the best of our airmen .
We never could have done the thing at all without Terry .
Jeff Margrave was born to be a poet , a botanist -- or both -- but his folks persuaded him to be a doctor instead .
He was a good one , for his age , but his real interest was in what he loved to call “ the wonders of science . ”
As for me , sociology ’s my major .
You have to back that up with a lot of other sciences , of course .
I ’m interested in them all .
Terry was strong on facts -- geography and meteorology and those ; Jeff could beat him any time on biology , and I did n’t care what it was they talked about , so long as it connected with human life , somehow .
There are few things that do n’t .
We three had a chance to join a big scientific expedition .
They needed a doctor , and that gave Jeff an excuse for dropping his just opening practice ; they needed Terry ’s experience , his machine , and his money ; and as for me , I got in through Terry ’s influence .
The expedition was up among the thousand tributaries and enormous hinterland of a great river , up where the maps had to be made , savage dialects studied , and all manner of strange flora and fauna expected .
But this story is not about that expedition .
That was only the merest starter for ours .
My interest was first roused by talk among our guides .
I ’m quick at languages , know a good many , and pick them up readily .
What with that and a really good interpreter we took with us , I made out quite a few legends and folk myths of these scattered tribes .
And as we got farther and farther upstream , in a dark tangle of rivers , lakes , morasses , and dense forests , with here and there an unexpected long spur running out from the big mountains beyond , I noticed that more and more of these savages had a story about a strange and terrible Woman Land in the high distance .
“ Up yonder , ” “ Over there , ” “ Way up ” -- was all the direction they could offer , but their legends all agreed on the main point -- that there was this strange country where no men lived -- only women and girl children .
None of them had ever seen it .
It was dangerous , deadly , they said , for any man to go there .
But there were tales of long ago , when some brave investigator had seen it -- a Big Country , Big Houses , Plenty People -- All Women .
Had no one else gone ?
Yes -- a good many -- but they never came back .
It was no place for men -- of that they seemed sure .
I told the boys about these stories , and they laughed at them .
Naturally I did myself .
I knew the stuff that savage dreams are made of .
But when we had reached our farthest point , just the day before we all had to turn around and start for home again , as the best of expeditions must in time , we three made a discovery .
The main encampment was on a spit of land running out into the main stream , or what we thought was the main stream .
It had the same muddy color we had been seeing for weeks past , the same taste .
I happened to speak of that river to our last guide , a rather superior fellow with quick , bright eyes .
He told me that there was another river -- “ over there , short river , sweet water , red and blue . ”
I was interested in this and anxious to see if I had understood , so I showed him a red and blue pencil I carried , and asked again .
Yes , he pointed to the river , and then to the southwestward .
“ River -- good water -- red and blue . ”
Terry was close by and interested in the fellow ’s pointing .
“ What does he say , Van ? ”
I told him .
Terry blazed up at once .
“ Ask him how far it is . ”
The man indicated a short journey ; I judged about two hours , maybe three .
“ Let ’s go , ” urged Terry .
“ Just us three .
Maybe we can really find something .
May be cinnabar in it . ”
“ May be indigo , ” Jeff suggested , with his lazy smile .
It was early yet ; we had just breakfasted ; and leaving word that we ’d be back before night , we got away quietly , not wishing to be thought too gullible if we failed , and secretly hoping to have some nice little discovery all to ourselves .
It was a long two hours , nearer three .
I fancy the savage could have done it alone much quicker .
There was a desperate tangle of wood and water and a swampy patch we never should have found our way across alone .
But there was one , and I could see Terry , with compass and notebook , marking directions and trying to place landmarks .
We came after a while to a sort of marshy lake , very big , so that the circling forest looked quite low and dim across it .
Our guide told us that boats could go from there to our camp -- but “ long way -- all day . ”
This water was somewhat clearer than that we had left , but we could not judge well from the margin .
We skirted it for another half hour or so , the ground growing firmer as we advanced , and presently we turned the corner of a wooded promontory and saw a quite different country -- a sudden view of mountains , steep and bare .
“ One of those long easterly spurs , ” Terry said appraisingly .
“ May be hundreds of miles from the range .
They crop out like that . ”
Suddenly we left the lake and struck directly toward the cliffs .
We heard running water before we reached it , and the guide pointed proudly to his river .
It was short .
We could see where it poured down a narrow vertical cataract from an opening in the face of the cliff .
It was sweet water .
The guide drank eagerly and so did we .
“ That ’s snow water , ” Terry announced .
“ Must come from way back in the hills . ”
But as to being red and blue -- it was greenish in tint .
The guide seemed not at all surprised .
He hunted about a little and showed us a quiet marginal pool where there were smears of red along the border ; yes , and of blue .
Terry got out his magnifying glass and squatted down to investigate .
“ Chemicals of some sort -- I ca n’t tell on the spot .
Look to me like dyestuffs .
Let ’s get nearer , ” he urged , “ up there by the fall . ”
We scrambled along the steep banks and got close to the pool that foamed and boiled beneath the falling water .
Here we searched the border and found traces of color beyond dispute .
More -- Jeff suddenly held up an unlooked-for trophy .
It was only a rag , a long , raveled fragment of cloth .
But it was a well-woven fabric , with a pattern , and of a clear scarlet that the water had not faded .
No savage tribe that we had heard of made such fabrics .
The guide stood serenely on the bank , well pleased with our excitement .
“ One day blue -- one day red -- one day green , ” he told us , and pulled from his pouch another strip of bright-hued cloth .
“ Come down , ” he said , pointing to the cataract .
“ Woman Country -- up there . ”
Then we were interested .
We had our rest and lunch right there and pumped the man for further information .
He could tell us only what the others had -- a land of women -- no men -- babies , but all girls .
No place for men -- dangerous .
Some had gone to see -- none had come back .
I could see Terry ’s jaw set at that .
No place for men ?
Dangerous ?
He looked as if he might shin up the waterfall on the spot .
But the guide would not hear of going up , even if there had been any possible method of scaling that sheer cliff , and we had to get back to our party before night .
“ They might stay if we told them , ” I suggested .
But Terry stopped in his tracks .
“ Look here , fellows , ” he said .
“ This is our find .
Let ’s not tell those cocky old professors .
Let ’s go on home with ‘ em , and then come back -- just us -- have a little expedition of our own . ”
THE SCARLET LETTER I .
THE PRISON DOOR A throng of bearded men , in sad-coloured garments and grey steeple-crowned hats , inter-mixed with women , some wearing hoods , and others bareheaded , was assembled in front of a wooden edifice , the door of which was heavily timbered with oak , and studded with iron spikes .
The founders of a new colony , whatever Utopia of human virtue and happiness they might originally project , have invariably recognised it among their earliest practical necessities to allot a portion of the virgin soil as a cemetery , and another portion as the site of a prison .
In accordance with this rule it may safely be assumed that the forefathers of Boston had built the first prison-house somewhere in the Vicinity of Cornhill , almost as seasonably as they marked out the first burial-ground , on Isaac Johnson 's lot , and round about his grave , which subsequently became the nucleus of all the congregated sepulchres in the old churchyard of King 's Chapel .
Certain it is that , some fifteen or twenty years after the settlement of the town , the wooden jail was already marked with weather-stains and other indications of age , which gave a yet darker aspect to its beetle-browed and gloomy front .
The rust on the ponderous iron-work of its oaken door looked more antique than anything else in the New World .
Like all that pertains to crime , it seemed never to have known a youthful era .
Before this ugly edifice , and between it and the wheel-track of the street , was a grass-plot , much overgrown with burdock , pig-weed , apple-pern , and such unsightly vegetation , which evidently found something congenial in the soil that had so early borne the black flower of civilised society , a prison .
But on one side of the portal , and rooted almost at the threshold , was a wild rose-bush , covered , in this month of June , with its delicate gems , which might be imagined to offer their fragrance and fragile beauty to the prisoner as he went in , and to the condemned criminal as he came forth to his doom , in token that the deep heart of Nature could pity and be kind to him .
This rose-bush , by a strange chance , has been kept alive in history ; but whether it had merely survived out of the stern old wilderness , so long after the fall of the gigantic pines and oaks that originally overshadowed it , or whether , as there is fair authority for believing , it had sprung up under the footsteps of the sainted Ann Hutchinson as she entered the prison-door , we shall not take upon us to determine .
Finding it so directly on the threshold of our narrative , which is now about to issue from that inauspicious portal , we could hardly do otherwise than pluck one of its flowers , and present it to the reader .
It may serve , let us hope , to symbolise some sweet moral blossom that may be found along the track , or relieve the darkening close of a tale of human frailty and sorrow .
II .
THE MARKET-PLACE The grass-plot before the jail , in Prison Lane , on a certain summer morning , not less than two centuries ago , was occupied by a pretty large number of the inhabitants of Boston , all with their eyes intently fastened on the iron-clamped oaken door .
Amongst any other population , or at a later period in the history of New England , the grim rigidity that petrified the bearded physiognomies of these good people would have augured some awful business in hand .
It could have betokened nothing short of the anticipated execution of some noted culprit , on whom the sentence of a legal tribunal had but confirmed the verdict of public sentiment .
But , in that early severity of the Puritan character , an inference of this kind could not so indubitably be drawn .
It might be that a sluggish bond-servant , or an undutiful child , whom his parents had given over to the civil authority , was to be corrected at the whipping-post .
It might be that an Antinomian , a Quaker , or other heterodox religionist , was to be scourged out of the town , or an idle or vagrant Indian , whom the white man 's firewater had made riotous about the streets , was to be driven with stripes into the shadow of the forest .
It might be , too , that a witch , like old Mistress Hibbins , the bitter-tempered widow of the magistrate , was to die upon the gallows .
In either case , there was very much the same solemnity of demeanour on the part of the spectators , as befitted a people among whom religion and law were almost identical , and in whose character both were so thoroughly interfused , that the mildest and severest acts of public discipline were alike made venerable and awful .
Meagre , indeed , and cold , was the sympathy that a transgressor might look for , from such bystanders , at the scaffold .
On the other hand , a penalty which , in our days , would infer a degree of mocking infamy and ridicule , might then be invested with almost as stern a dignity as the punishment of death itself .
It was a circumstance to be noted on the summer morning when our story begins its course , that the women , of whom there were several in the crowd , appeared to take a peculiar interest in whatever penal infliction might be expected to ensue .
The age had not so much refinement , that any sense of impropriety restrained the wearers of petticoat and farthingale from stepping forth into the public ways , and wedging their not unsubstantial persons , if occasion were , into the throng nearest to the scaffold at an execution .
Morally , as well as materially , there was a coarser fibre in those wives and maidens of old English birth and breeding than in their fair descendants , separated from them by a series of six or seven generations ; for , throughout that chain of ancestry , every successive mother had transmitted to her child a fainter bloom , a more delicate and briefer beauty , and a slighter physical frame , if not character of less force and solidity than her own .
The women who were now standing about the prison-door stood within less than half a century of the period when the man-like Elizabeth had been the not altogether unsuitable representative of the sex .
They were her countrywomen : and the beef and ale of their native land , with a moral diet not a whit more refined , entered largely into their composition .
The bright morning sun , therefore , shone on broad shoulders and well-developed busts , and on round and ruddy cheeks , that had ripened in the far-off island , and had hardly yet grown paler or thinner in the atmosphere of New England .
There was , moreover , a boldness and rotundity of speech among these matrons , as most of them seemed to be , that would startle us at the present day , whether in respect to its purport or its volume of tone .
" Goodwives , " said a hard-featured dame of fifty , " I 'll tell ye a piece of my mind .
It would be greatly for the public behoof if we women , being of mature age and church-members in good repute , should have the handling of such malefactresses as this Hester Prynne .
What think ye , gossips ?
If the hussy stood up for judgment before us five , that are now here in a knot together , would she come off with such a sentence as the worshipful magistrates have awarded ?
Marry , I trow not . "
" People say , " said another , " that the Reverend Master Dimmesdale , her godly pastor , takes it very grievously to heart that such a scandal should have come upon his congregation . "
" The magistrates are God-fearing gentlemen , but merciful overmuch -- that is a truth , " added a third autumnal matron .
" At the very least , they should have put the brand of a hot iron on Hester Prynne 's forehead .
Madame Hester would have winced at that , I warrant me .
But she -- the naughty baggage -- little will she care what they put upon the bodice of her gown !
Why , look you , she may cover it with a brooch , or such like heathenish adornment , and so walk the streets as brave as ever ! "
" Ah , but , " interposed , more softly , a young wife , holding a child by the hand , " let her cover the mark as she will , the pang of it will be always in her heart . "
" What do we talk of marks and brands , whether on the bodice of her gown or the flesh of her forehead ? "
cried another female , the ugliest as well as the most pitiless of these self-constituted judges .
" This woman has brought shame upon us all , and ought to die ; is there not law for it ?
Truly there is , both in the Scripture and the statute-book .
Then let the magistrates , who have made it of no effect , thank themselves if their own wives and daughters go astray . "
" Mercy on us , goodwife ! "
exclaimed a man in the crowd , " is there no virtue in woman , save what springs from a wholesome fear of the gallows ?
That is the hardest word yet !
Hush now , gossips for the lock is turning in the prison-door , and here comes Mistress Prynne herself . "
The door of the jail being flung open from within there appeared , in the first place , like a black shadow emerging into sunshine , the grim and grisly presence of the town-beadle , with a sword by his side , and his staff of office in his hand .
This personage prefigured and represented in his aspect the whole dismal severity of the Puritanic code of law , which it was his business to administer in its final and closest application to the offender .
Stretching forth the official staff in his left hand , he laid his right upon the shoulder of a young woman , whom he thus drew forward , until , on the threshold of the prison-door , she repelled him , by an action marked with natural dignity and force of character , and stepped into the open air as if by her own free will .
She bore in her arms a child , a baby of some three months old , who winked and turned aside its little face from the too vivid light of day ; because its existence , heretofore , had brought it acquaintance only with the grey twilight of a dungeon , or other darksome apartment of the prison .
When the young woman -- the mother of this child -- stood fully revealed before the crowd , it seemed to be her first impulse to clasp the infant closely to her bosom ; not so much by an impulse of motherly affection , as that she might thereby conceal a certain token , which was wrought or fastened into her dress .
In a moment , however , wisely judging that one token of her shame would but poorly serve to hide another , she took the baby on her arm , and with a burning blush , and yet a haughty smile , and a glance that would not be abashed , looked around at her townspeople and neighbours .
On the breast of her gown , in fine red cloth , surrounded with an elaborate embroidery and fantastic flourishes of gold thread , appeared the letter A .
It was so artistically done , and with so much fertility and gorgeous luxuriance of fancy , that it had all the effect of a last and fitting decoration to the apparel which she wore , and which was of a splendour in accordance with the taste of the age , but greatly beyond what was allowed by the sumptuary regulations of the colony .
CHAPTER I At sunset hour the forest was still , lonely , sweet with tang of fir and spruce , blazing in gold and red and green ; and the man who glided on under the great trees seemed to blend with the colors and , disappearing , to have become a part of the wild woodland .
Old Baldy , highest of the White Mountains , stood up round and bare , rimmed bright gold in the last glow of the setting sun .
Then , as the fire dropped behind the domed peak , a change , a cold and darkening blight , passed down the black spear-pointed slopes over all that mountain world .
It was a wild , richly timbered , and abundantly watered region of dark forests and grassy parks , ten thousand feet above sea-level , isolated on all sides by the southern Arizona desert -- the virgin home of elk and deer , of bear and lion , of wolf and fox , and the birthplace as well as the hiding-place of the fierce Apache .
September in that latitude was marked by the sudden cool night breeze following shortly after sundown .
Twilight appeared to come on its wings , as did faint sounds , not distinguishable before in the stillness .
Milt Dale , man of the forest , halted at the edge of a timbered ridge , to listen and to watch .
Beneath him lay a narrow valley , open and grassy , from which rose a faint murmur of running water .
Its music was pierced by the wild staccato yelp of a hunting coyote .
From overhead in the giant fir came a twittering and rustling of grouse settling for the night ; and from across the valley drifted the last low calls of wild turkeys going to roost .
To Dale 's keen ear these sounds were all they should have been , betokening an unchanged serenity of forestland .
He was glad , for he had expected to hear the clipclop of white men 's horses -- which to hear up in those fastnesses was hateful to him .
He and the Indian were friends .
That fierce foe had no enmity toward the lone hunter .
But there hid somewhere in the forest a gang of bad men , sheep-thieves , whom Dale did not want to meet .
As he started out upon the slope , a sudden flaring of the afterglow of sunset flooded down from Old Baldy , filling the valley with lights and shadows , yellow and blue , like the radiance of the sky .
The pools in the curves of the brook shone darkly bright .
Dale 's gaze swept up and down the valley , and then tried to pierce the black shadows across the brook where the wall of spruce stood up , its speared and spiked crest against the pale clouds .
The wind began to moan in the trees and there was a feeling of rain in the air .
Dale , striking a trail , turned his back to the fading afterglow and strode down the valley .
With night at hand and a rain-storm brewing , he did not head for his own camp , some miles distant , but directed his steps toward an old log cabin .
When he reached it darkness had almost set in .
He approached with caution .
This cabin , like the few others scattered in the valleys , might harbor Indians or a bear or a panther .
Nothing , however , appeared to be there .
Then Dale studied the clouds driving across the sky , and he felt the cool dampness of a fine , misty rain on his face .
It would rain off and on during the night .
Whereupon he entered the cabin .
And the next moment he heard quick hoof-beats of trotting horses .
Peering out , he saw dim , moving forms in the darkness , quite close at hand .
They had approached against the wind so that sound had been deadened .
Five horses with riders , Dale made out -- saw them loom close .
Then he heard rough voices .
Quickly he turned to feel in the dark for a ladder he knew led to a loft ; and finding it , he quickly mounted , taking care not to make a noise with his rifle , and lay down upon the floor of brush and poles .
Scarcely had he done so when heavy steps , with accompaniment of clinking spurs , passed through the door below into the cabin .
“ Wal , Beasley , are you here ? ” queried a loud voice .
There was no reply .
The man below growled under his breath , and again the spurs jingled .
“ Fellars , Beasley ai n't here yet , ” he called .
“ Put the hosses under the shed .
We 'll wait . ”
“ Wait , huh ! ” came a harsh reply .
“ Mebbe all night -- an ' we got nuthin ' to eat . ”
“ Shut up , Moze .
Reckon you 're no good for anythin ' but eatin ' .
Put them hosses away an ' some of you rustle fire-wood in here . ”
Low , muttered curses , then mingled with dull thuds of hoofs and strain of leather and heaves of tired horses .
Another shuffling , clinking footstep entered the cabin .
“ Snake , it 'd been sense to fetch a pack along , ” drawled this newcomer .
“ Reckon so , Jim .
But we did n't , an ' what 's the use hollerin ' ?
Beasley wo n't keep us waitin ' long . ”
Dale , lying still and prone , felt a slow start in all his blood -- a thrilling wave .
That deep-voiced man below was Snake Anson , the worst and most dangerous character of the region ; and the others , undoubtedly , composed his gang , long notorious in that sparsely settled country .
And the Beasley mentioned -- he was one of the two biggest ranchers and sheep-raisers of the White Mountain ranges .
What was the meaning of a rendezvous between Snake Anson and Beasley ?
Milt Dale answered that question to Beasley 's discredit ; and many strange matters pertaining to sheep and herders , always a mystery to the little village of Pine , now became as clear as daylight .
Other men entered the cabin .
“ It ai n't a-goin ' to rain much , ” said one .
Then came a crash of wood thrown to the ground .
“ Jim , hyar 's a chunk of pine log , dry as punk , ” said another .
Rustlings and slow footsteps , and then heavy thuds attested to the probability that Jim was knocking the end of a log upon the ground to split off a corner whereby a handful of dry splinters could be procured .
“ Snake , lem me your pipe , an ' I 'll hev a fire in a jiffy . ”
“ Wal , I want my terbacco an ' I ai n't carin ' about no fire , ” replied Snake .
“ Reckon you 're the meanest cuss in these woods , ” drawled Jim .
Sharp click of steel on flint -- many times -- and then a sound of hard blowing and sputtering told of Jim 's efforts to start a fire .
Presently the pitchy blackness of the cabin changed ; there came a little crackling of wood and the rustle of flame , and then a steady growing roar .
As it chanced , Dale lay face down upon the floor of the loft , and right near his eyes there were cracks between the boughs .
When the fire blazed up he was fairly well able to see the men below .
The only one he had ever seen was Jim Wilson , who had been well known at Pine before Snake Anson had ever been heard of .
Jim was the best of a bad lot , and he had friends among the honest people .
It was rumored that he and Snake did not pull well together .
“ Fire feels good , ” said the burly Moze , who appeared as broad as he was black-visaged .
“ Fall 's sure a-comin ' ... Now if only we had some grub ! ”
“ Moze , there 's a hunk of deer meat in my saddle-bag , an ' if you git it you can have half , ” spoke up another voice .
Moze shuffled out with alacrity .
In the firelight Snake Anson 's face looked lean and serpent-like , his eyes glittered , and his long neck and all of his long length carried out the analogy of his name .
“ Snake , what 's this here deal with Beasley ? ” inquired Jim .
“ Reckon you 'll l'arn when I do , ” replied the leader .
He appeared tired and thoughtful .
“ Ai n't we done away with enough of them poor greaser herders -- for nothin ' ? ” queried the youngest of the gang , a boy in years , whose hard , bitter lips and hungry eyes somehow set him apart from his comrades .
“ You 're dead right , Burt -- an ' that 's my stand , ” replied the man who had sent Moze out .
“ Snake , snow 'll be flyin ' round these woods before long , ” said Jim Wilson .
“ Are we goin ' to winter down in the Tonto Basin or over on the Gila ? ”
“ Reckon we 'll do some tall ridin ' before we strike south , ” replied Snake , gruffly .
At the juncture Moze returned .
“ Boss , I heerd a hoss comin ' up the trail , ” he said .
Snake rose and stood at the door , listening .
Outside the wind moaned fitfully and scattering raindrops pattered upon the cabin .
“ A-huh ! ” exclaimed Snake , in relief .
Silence ensued then for a moment , at the end of which interval Dale heard a rapid clip-clop on the rocky trail outside .
The men below shuffled uneasily , but none of them spoke .
The fire cracked cheerily .
Snake Anson stepped back from before the door with an action that expressed both doubt and caution .
The trotting horse had halted out there somewhere .
“ Ho there , inside ! ” called a voice from the darkness .
“ Ho yourself ! ” replied Anson .
“ That you , Snake ? ” quickly followed the query .
“ Reckon so , ” returned Anson , showing himself .
The newcomer entered .
He was a large man , wearing a slicker that shone wet in the firelight .
His sombrero , pulled well down , shadowed his face , so that the upper half of his features might as well have been masked .
He had a black , drooping mustache , and a chin like a rock .
A potential force , matured and powerful , seemed to be wrapped in his movements .
“ Hullo , Snake !
Hullo , Wilson ! ” he said .
“ I 've backed out on the other deal .
Sent for you on -- on another little matter ... particular private . ”
Here he indicated with a significant gesture that Snake 's men were to leave the cabin .
“ A-huh !
ejaculated Anson , dubiously .
Then he turned abruptly .
Moze , you an ' Shady an ' Burt go wait outside .
Reckon this ai n't the deal I expected ... .
An ' you can saddle the hosses . ”
CHAPTER I JONATHAN HARKER 'S JOURNAL ( _ Kept in shorthand .
_ ) _ 3 May .
Bistritz .
_ -- Left Munich at 8:35 P. M. , on 1st May , arriving at Vienna early next morning ; should have arrived at 6:46 , but train was an hour late .
Buda-Pesth seems a wonderful place , from the glimpse which I got of it from the train and the little I could walk through the streets .
I feared to go very far from the station , as we had arrived late and would start as near the correct time as possible .
The impression I had was that we were leaving the West and entering the East ; the most western of splendid bridges over the Danube , which is here of noble width and depth , took us among the traditions of Turkish rule .
We left in pretty good time , and came after nightfall to Klausenburgh .
Here I stopped for the night at the Hotel Royale .
I had for dinner , or rather supper , a chicken done up some way with red pepper , which was very good but thirsty .
( _ Mem .
_ , get recipe for Mina . )
I asked the waiter , and he said it was called " paprika hendl , " and that , as it was a national dish , I should be able to get it anywhere along the Carpathians .
I found my smattering of German very useful here ; indeed , I do n't know how I should be able to get on without it .
Having had some time at my disposal when in London , I had visited the British Museum , and made search among the books and maps in the library regarding Transylvania ; it had struck me that some foreknowledge of the country could hardly fail to have some importance in dealing with a nobleman of that country .
I find that the district he named is in the extreme east of the country , just on the borders of three states , Transylvania , Moldavia and Bukovina , in the midst of the Carpathian mountains ; one of the wildest and least known portions of Europe .
I was not able to light on any map or work giving the exact locality of the Castle Dracula , as there are no maps of this country as yet to compare with our own Ordnance Survey maps ; but I found that Bistritz , the post town named by Count Dracula , is a fairly well-known place .
I shall enter here some of my notes , as they may refresh my memory when I talk over my travels with Mina .
In the population of Transylvania there are four distinct nationalities : Saxons in the South , and mixed with them the Wallachs , who are the descendants of the Dacians ; Magyars in the West , and Szekelys in the East and North .
I am going among the latter , who claim to be descended from Attila and the Huns .
This may be so , for when the Magyars conquered the country in the eleventh century they found the Huns settled in it .
I read that every known superstition in the world is gathered into the horseshoe of the Carpathians , as if it were the centre of some sort of imaginative whirlpool ; if so my stay may be very interesting .
( _ Mem .
_ , I must ask the Count all about them . )
I did not sleep well , though my bed was comfortable enough , for I had all sorts of queer dreams .
There was a dog howling all night under my window , which may have had something to do with it ; or it may have been the paprika , for I had to drink up all the water in my carafe , and was still thirsty .
Towards morning I slept and was wakened by the continuous knocking at my door , so I guess I must have been sleeping soundly then .
I had for breakfast more paprika , and a sort of porridge of maize flour which they said was " mamaliga , " and egg-plant stuffed with forcemeat , a very excellent dish , which they call " impletata . "
( _ Mem .
_ , get recipe for this also . )
I had to hurry breakfast , for the train started a little before eight , or rather it ought to have done so , for after rushing to the station at 7:30 I had to sit in the carriage for more than an hour before we began to move .
It seems to me that the further east you go the more unpunctual are the trains .
What ought they to be in China ?
All day long we seemed to dawdle through a country which was full of beauty of every kind .
Sometimes we saw little towns or castles on the top of steep hills such as we see in old missals ; sometimes we ran by rivers and streams which seemed from the wide stony margin on each side of them to be subject to great floods .
It takes a lot of water , and running strong , to sweep the outside edge of a river clear .
At every station there were groups of people , sometimes crowds , and in all sorts of attire .
Some of them were just like the peasants at home or those I saw coming through France and Germany , with short jackets and round hats and home-made trousers ; but others were very picturesque .
The women looked pretty , except when you got near them , but they were very clumsy about the waist .
They had all full white sleeves of some kind or other , and most of them had big belts with a lot of strips of something fluttering from them like the dresses in a ballet , but of course there were petticoats under them .
The strangest figures we saw were the Slovaks , who were more barbarian than the rest , with their big cow-boy hats , great baggy dirty-white trousers , white linen shirts , and enormous heavy leather belts , nearly a foot wide , all studded over with brass nails .
They wore high boots , with their trousers tucked into them , and had long black hair and heavy black moustaches .
They are very picturesque , but do not look prepossessing .
On the stage they would be set down at once as some old Oriental band of brigands .
They are , however , I am told , very harmless and rather wanting in natural self-assertion .
It was on the dark side of twilight when we got to Bistritz , which is a very interesting old place .
Being practically on the frontier -- for the Borgo Pass leads from it into Bukovina -- it has had a very stormy existence , and it certainly shows marks of it .
Fifty years ago a series of great fires took place , which made terrible havoc on five separate occasions .
At the very beginning of the seventeenth century it underwent a siege of three weeks and lost 13,000 people , the casualties of war proper being assisted by famine and disease .
Count Dracula had directed me to go to the Golden Krone Hotel , which I found , to my great delight , to be thoroughly old-fashioned , for of course I wanted to see all I could of the ways of the country .
I was evidently expected , for when I got near the door I faced a cheery-looking elderly woman in the usual peasant dress -- white undergarment with long double apron , front , and back , of coloured stuff fitting almost too tight for modesty .
When I came close she bowed and said , " The Herr Englishman ? "
" Yes , " I said , " Jonathan Harker . "
She smiled , and gave some message to an elderly man in white shirt-sleeves , who had followed her to the door .
He went , but immediately returned with a letter : -- " My Friend .
-- Welcome to the Carpathians .
I am anxiously expecting you .
Sleep well to-night .
At three to-morrow the diligence will start for Bukovina ; a place on it is kept for you .
At the Borgo Pass my carriage will await you and will bring you to me .
I trust that your journey from London has been a happy one , and that you will enjoy your stay in my beautiful land .
" Your friend , " DRACULA . "
_ 4 May .
_ -- I found that my landlord had got a letter from the Count , directing him to secure the best place on the coach for me ; but on making inquiries as to details he seemed somewhat reticent , and pretended that he could not understand my German .
This could not be true , because up to then he had understood it perfectly ; at least , he answered my questions exactly as if he did .
He and his wife , the old lady who had received me , looked at each other in a frightened sort of way .
He mumbled out that the money had been sent in a letter , and that was all he knew .
When I asked him if he knew Count Dracula , and could tell me anything of his castle , both he and his wife crossed themselves , and , saying that they knew nothing at all , simply refused to speak further .
It was so near the time of starting that I had no time to ask any one else , for it was all very mysterious and not by any means comforting .
Just before I was leaving , the old lady came up to my room and said in a very hysterical way : " Must you go ?
Oh !
young Herr , must you go ? "
She was in such an excited state that she seemed to have lost her grip of what German she knew , and mixed it all up with some other language which I did not know at all .
I was just able to follow her by asking many questions .
When I told her that I must go at once , and that I was engaged on important business , she asked again : " Do you know what day it is ? "
I answered that it was the fourth of May .
She shook her head as she said again : " Oh , yes !
I know that !
I know that , but do you know what day it is ? "
On my saying that I did not understand , she went on : " It is the eve of St. George 's Day .
Do you not know that to-night , when the clock strikes midnight , all the evil things in the world will have full sway ?
Do you know where you are going , and what you are going to ? "
She was in such evident distress that I tried to comfort her , but without effect .
Finally she went down on her knees and implored me not to go ; at least to wait a day or two before starting .
It was all very ridiculous but I did not feel comfortable .
However , there was business to be done , and I could allow nothing to interfere with it .
I therefore tried to raise her up , and said , as gravely as I could , that I thanked her , but my duty was imperative , and that I must go .
She then rose and dried her eyes , and taking a crucifix from her neck offered it to me .
I did not know what to do , for , as an English Churchman , I have been taught to regard such things as in some measure idolatrous , and yet it seemed so ungracious to refuse an old lady meaning so well and in such a state of mind .
She saw , I suppose , the doubt in my face , for she put the rosary round my neck , and said , " For your mother 's sake , " and went out of the room .
I am writing up this part of the diary whilst I am waiting for the coach , which is , of course , late ; and the crucifix is still round my neck .
Whether it is the old lady 's fear , or the many ghostly traditions of this place , or the crucifix itself , I do not know , but I am not feeling nearly as easy in my mind as usual .
If this book should ever reach Mina before I do , let it bring my good-bye .
Here comes the coach !
I The day broke gray and dull .
The clouds hung heavily , and there was a rawness in the air that suggested snow .
A woman servant came into a room in which a child was sleeping and drew the curtains .
She glanced mechanically at the house opposite , a stucco house with a portico , and went to the child 's bed .
" Wake up , Philip , " she said .
She pulled down the bed-clothes , took him in her arms , and carried him downstairs .
He was only half awake .
" Your mother wants you , " she said .
She opened the door of a room on the floor below and took the child over to a bed in which a woman was lying .
It was his mother .
She stretched out her arms , and the child nestled by her side .
He did not ask why he had been awakened .
The woman kissed his eyes , and with thin , small hands felt the warm body through his white flannel nightgown .
She pressed him closer to herself .
" Are you sleepy , darling ? "
she said .
Her voice was so weak that it seemed to come already from a great distance .
The child did not answer , but smiled comfortably .
He was very happy in the large , warm bed , with those soft arms about him .
He tried to make himself smaller still as he cuddled up against his mother , and he kissed her sleepily .
In a moment he closed his eyes and was fast asleep .
The doctor came forwards and stood by the bed-side .
" Oh , do n't take him away yet , " she moaned .
The doctor , without answering , looked at her gravely .
Knowing she would not be allowed to keep the child much longer , the woman kissed him again ; and she passed her hand down his body till she came to his feet ; she held the right foot in her hand and felt the five small toes ; and then slowly passed her hand over the left one .
She gave a sob .
" What 's the matter ? "
said the doctor .
" You 're tired . "
She shook her head , unable to speak , and the tears rolled down her cheeks .
The doctor bent down .
" Let me take him . "
She was too weak to resist his wish , and she gave the child up .
The doctor handed him back to his nurse .
" You 'd better put him back in his own bed . "
" Very well , sir . "
The little boy , still sleeping , was taken away .
His mother sobbed now broken-heartedly .
" What will happen to him , poor child ? "
The monthly nurse tried to quiet her , and presently , from exhaustion , the crying ceased .
The doctor walked to a table on the other side of the room , upon which , under a towel , lay the body of a still-born child .
He lifted the towel and looked .
He was hidden from the bed by a screen , but the woman guessed what he was doing .
" Was it a girl or a boy ? "
she whispered to the nurse .
" Another boy . "
The woman did not answer .
In a moment the child 's nurse came back .
She approached the bed .
" Master Philip never woke up , " she said .
There was a pause .
Then the doctor felt his patient 's pulse once more .
" I do n't think there 's anything I can do just now , " he said .
" I 'll call again after breakfast . "
" I 'll show you out , sir , " said the child 's nurse .
They walked downstairs in silence .
In the hall the doctor stopped .
" You 've sent for Mrs. Carey 's brother-in-law , have n't you ? "
" Yes , sir . "
" D'you know at what time he 'll be here ? "
" No , sir , I 'm expecting a telegram . "
" What about the little boy ?
I should think he 'd be better out of the way . "
" Miss Watkin said she 'd take him , sir . "
" Who 's she ? "
" She 's his godmother , sir .
D'you think Mrs. Carey will get over it , sir ? "
The doctor shook his head .
II It was a week later .
Philip was sitting on the floor in the drawing-room at Miss Watkin 's house in Onslow gardens .
He was an only child and used to amusing himself .
The room was filled with massive furniture , and on each of the sofas were three big cushions .
There was a cushion too in each arm-chair .
All these he had taken and , with the help of the gilt rout chairs , light and easy to move , had made an elaborate cave in which he could hide himself from the Red Indians who were lurking behind the curtains .
He put his ear to the floor and listened to the herd of buffaloes that raced across the prairie .
Presently , hearing the door open , he held his breath so that he might not be discovered ; but a violent hand pulled away a chair and the cushions fell down .
" You naughty boy , Miss Watkin WILL be cross with you . "
" Hulloa , Emma ! "
he said .
The nurse bent down and kissed him , then began to shake out the cushions , and put them back in their places .
" Am I to come home ? "
he asked .
" Yes , I 've come to fetch you . "
" You 've got a new dress on . "
It was in eighteen-eighty-five , and she wore a bustle .
Her gown was of black velvet , with tight sleeves and sloping shoulders , and the skirt had three large flounces .
She wore a black bonnet with velvet strings .
She hesitated .
The question she had expected did not come , and so she could not give the answer she had prepared .
" Are n't you going to ask how your mamma is ? "
she said at length .
" Oh , I forgot .
How is mamma ? "
Now she was ready .
" Your mamma is quite well and happy . "
" Oh , I am glad . "
" Your mamma 's gone away .
You wo n't ever see her any more . "
Philip did not know what she meant .
" Why not ? "
" Your mamma 's in heaven . "
She began to cry , and Philip , though he did not quite understand , cried too .
Emma was a tall , big-boned woman , with fair hair and large features .
She came from Devonshire and , notwithstanding her many years of service in London , had never lost the breadth of her accent .
Her tears increased her emotion , and she pressed the little boy to her heart .
She felt vaguely the pity of that child deprived of the only love in the world that is quite unselfish .
It seemed dreadful that he must be handed over to strangers .
But in a little while she pulled herself together .
" Your Uncle William is waiting in to see you , " she said .
" Go and say good-bye to Miss Watkin , and we 'll go home . "
" I do n't want to say good-bye , " he answered , instinctively anxious to hide his tears .
" Very well , run upstairs and get your hat . "
He fetched it , and when he came down Emma was waiting for him in the hall .
He heard the sound of voices in the study behind the dining-room .
He paused .
He knew that Miss Watkin and her sister were talking to friends , and it seemed to him -- he was nine years old -- that if he went in they would be sorry for him .
" I think I 'll go and say good-bye to Miss Watkin . "
" I think you 'd better , " said Emma .
" Go in and tell them I 'm coming , " he said .
He wished to make the most of his opportunity .
Emma knocked at the door and walked in .
He heard her speak .
" Master Philip wants to say good-bye to you , miss . "
There was a sudden hush of the conversation , and Philip limped in .
Henrietta Watkin was a stout woman , with a red face and dyed hair .
In those days to dye the hair excited comment , and Philip had heard much gossip at home when his godmother 's changed colour .
She lived with an elder sister , who had resigned herself contentedly to old age .
Two ladies , whom Philip did not know , were calling , and they looked at him curiously .
" My poor child , " said Miss Watkin , opening her arms .
She began to cry .
Philip understood now why she had not been in to luncheon and why she wore a black dress .
She could not speak .
" I 've got to go home , " said Philip , at last .
He disengaged himself from Miss Watkin 's arms , and she kissed him again .
Then he went to her sister and bade her good-bye too .
One of the strange ladies asked if she might kiss him , and he gravely gave her permission .
Though crying , he keenly enjoyed the sensation he was causing ; he would have been glad to stay a little longer to be made much of , but felt they expected him to go , so he said that Emma was waiting for him .
He went out of the room .
Emma had gone downstairs to speak with a friend in the basement , and he waited for her on the landing .
He heard Henrietta Watkin 's voice .
" His mother was my greatest friend .
I ca n't bear to think that she 's dead . "
" You ought n't to have gone to the funeral , Henrietta , " said her sister .
" I knew it would upset you . "
Then one of the strangers spoke .
" Poor little boy , it 's dreadful to think of him quite alone in the world .
I see he limps . "
" Yes , he 's got a club-foot .
It was such a grief to his mother . "
Then Emma came back .
They called a hansom , and she told the driver where to go .
III When they reached the house Mrs. Carey had died in -- it was in a dreary , respectable street between Notting Hill Gate and High Street , Kensington -- Emma led Philip into the drawing-room .
His uncle was writing letters of thanks for the wreaths which had been sent .
One of them , which had arrived too late for the funeral , lay in its cardboard box on the hall-table .
" Here 's Master Philip , " said Emma .
I .
The Return THERE WAS SOMETHING about the coast town of Dunnet which made it seem more attractive than other maritime villages of eastern Maine .
Perhaps it was the simple fact of acquaintance with that neighborhood which made it so attaching , and gave such interest to the rocky shore and dark woods , and the few houses which seemed to be securely wedged and tree-nailed in among the ledges by the Landing .
These houses made the most of their seaward view , and there was a gayety and determined floweriness in their bits of garden ground ; the small-paned high windows in the peaks of their steep gables were like knowing eyes that watched the harbor and the far sea-line beyond , or looked northward all along the shore and its background of spruces and balsam firs .
When one really knows a village like this and its surroundings , it is like becoming acquainted with a single person .
The process of falling in love at first sight is as final as it is swift in such a case , but the growth of true friendship may be a lifelong affair .
After a first brief visit made two or three summers before in the course of a yachting cruise , a lover of Dunnet Landing returned to find the unchanged shores of the pointed firs , the same quaintness of the village with its elaborate conventionalities ; all that mixture of remoteness , and childish certainty of being the centre of civilization of which her affectionate dreams had told .
One evening in June , a single passenger landed upon the steamboat wharf .
The tide was high , there was a fine crowd of spectators , and the younger portion of the company followed her with subdued excitement up the narrow street of the salt-aired , white-clapboarded little town .
II .
Mrs. Todd LATER , THERE WAS only one fault to find with this choice of a summer lodging-place , and that was its complete lack of seclusion .
At first the tiny house of Mrs. Almira Todd , which stood with its end to the street , appeared to be retired and sheltered enough from the busy world , behind its bushy bit of a green garden , in which all the blooming things , two or three gay hollyhocks and some London-pride , were pushed back against the gray-shingled wall .
It was a queer little garden and puzzling to a stranger , the few flowers being put at a disadvantage by so much greenery ; but the discovery was soon made that Mrs. Todd was an ardent lover of herbs , both wild and tame , and the sea-breezes blew into the low end-window of the house laden with not only sweet-brier and sweet-mary , but balm and sage and borage and mint , wormwood and southernwood .
If Mrs. Todd had occasion to step into the far corner of her herb plot , she trod heavily upon thyme , and made its fragrant presence known with all the rest .
Being a very large person , her full skirts brushed and bent almost every slender stalk that her feet missed .
You could always tell when she was stepping about there , even when you were half awake in the morning , and learned to know , in the course of a few weeks ’ experience , in exactly which corner of the garden she might be .
At one side of this herb plot were other growths of a rustic pharmacopoeia , great treasures and rarities among the commoner herbs .
There were some strange and pungent odors that roused a dim sense and remembrance of something in the forgotten past .
Some of these might once have belonged to sacred and mystic rites , and have had some occult knowledge handed with them down the centuries ; but now they pertained only to humble compounds brewed at intervals with molasses or vinegar or spirits in a small caldron on Mrs. Todd ’s kitchen stove .
They were dispensed to suffering neighbors , who usually came at night as if by stealth , bringing their own ancient-looking vials to be filled .
One nostrum was called the Indian remedy , and its price was but fifteen cents ; the whispered directions could be heard as customers passed the windows .
With most remedies the purchaser was allowed to depart unadmonished from the kitchen , Mrs. Todd being a wise saver of steps ; but with certain vials she gave cautions , standing in the doorway , and there were other doses which had to be accompanied on their healing way as far as the gate , while she muttered long chapters of directions , and kept up an air of secrecy and importance to the last .
It may not have been only the common aids of humanity with which she tried to cope ; it seemed sometimes as if love and hate and jealousy and adverse winds at sea might also find their proper remedies among the curious wild-looking plants in Mrs. Todd ’s garden .
The village doctor and this learned herbalist were upon the best of terms .
The good man may have counted upon the unfavorable effect of certain potions which he should find his opportunity in counteracting ; at any rate , he now and then stopped and exchanged greetings with Mrs. Todd over the picket fence .
The conversation became at once professional after the briefest preliminaries , and he would stand twirling a sweet-scented sprig in his fingers , and make suggestive jokes , perhaps about her faith in a too persistent course of thoroughwort elixir , in which my landlady professed such firm belief as sometimes to endanger the life and usefulness of worthy neighbors .
To arrive at this quietest of seaside villages late in June , when the busy herb-gathering season was just beginning , was also to arrive in the early prime of Mrs. Todd ’s activity in the brewing of old-fashioned spruce beer .
This cooling and refreshing drink had been brought to wonderful perfection through a long series of experiments ; it had won immense local fame , and the supplies for its manufacture were always giving out and having to be replenished .
For various reasons , the seclusion and uninterrupted days which had been looked forward to proved to be very rare in this otherwise delightful corner of the world .
My hostess and I had made our shrewd business agreement on the basis of a simple cold luncheon at noon , and liberal restitution in the matter of hot suppers , to provide for which the lodger might sometimes be seen hurrying down the road , late in the day , with cunner line in hand .
It was soon found that this arrangement made large allowance for Mrs. Todd ’s slow herb-gathering progresses through woods and pastures .
The spruce-beer customers were pretty steady in hot weather , and there were many demands for different soothing syrups and elixirs with which the unwise curiosity of my early residence had made me acquainted .
Knowing Mrs. Todd to be a widow , who had little beside this slender business and the income from one hungry lodger to maintain her , one ’s energies and even interest were quickly bestowed , until it became a matter of course that she should go afield every pleasant day , and that the lodger should answer all peremptory knocks at the side door .
In taking an occasional wisdom-giving stroll in Mrs. Todd ’s company , and in acting as business partner during her frequent absences , I found the July days fly fast , and it was not until I felt myself confronted with too great pride and pleasure in the display , one night , of two dollars and twenty-seven cents which I had taken in during the day , that I remembered a long piece of writing , sadly belated now , which I was bound to do .
To have been patted kindly on the shoulder and called “ darlin ’ , ” to have been offered a surprise of early mushrooms for supper , to have had all the glory of making two dollars and twenty-seven cents in a single day , and then to renounce it all and withdraw from these pleasant successes , needed much resolution .
Literary employments are so vexed with uncertainties at best , and it was not until the voice of conscience sounded louder in my ears than the sea on the nearest pebble beach that I said unkind words of withdrawal to Mrs. Todd .
She only became more wistfully affectionate than ever in her expressions , and looked as disappointed as I expected when I frankly told her that I could no longer enjoy the pleasure of what we called “ seein ’ folks . ”
I felt that I was cruel to a whole neighborhood in curtailing her liberty in this most important season for harvesting the different wild herbs that were so much counted upon to ease their winter ails .
“ Well , dear , ” she said sorrowfully , “ I ’ve took great advantage o ’ your bein ’ here .
I ai n’t had such a season for years , but I have never had nobody I could so trust .
All you lack is a few qualities , but with time you ’d gain judgment an ’ experience , an ’ be very able in the business .
I ’d stand right here an ’ say it to anybody . ”
Mrs. Todd and I were not separated or estranged by the change in our business relations ; on the contrary , a deeper intimacy seemed to begin .
I do not know what herb of the night it was that used sometimes to send out a penetrating odor late in the evening , after the dew had fallen , and the moon was high , and the cool air came up from the sea .
Then Mrs. Todd would feel that she must talk to somebody , and I was only too glad to listen .
We both fell under the spell , and she either stood outside the window , or made an errand to my sitting-room , and told , it might be very commonplace news of the day , or , as happened one misty summer night , all that lay deepest in her heart .
It was in this way that I came to know that she had loved one who was far above her .
“ No , dear , him I speak of could never think of me , ” she said .
“ When we was young together his mother did n’t favor the match , an ’ done everything she could to part us ; and folks thought we both married well , but ’ t wa ’n’ t what either one of us wanted most ; an ’ now we ’re left alone again , an ’ might have had each other all the time .
He was above bein ’ a seafarin ’ man , an ’ prospered more than most ; he come of a high family , an ’ my lot was plain an ’ hard-workin ’ .
I ai n’t seen him for some years ; he ’s forgot our youthful feelin ’s , I expect , but a woman ’s heart is different ; them feelin ’s comes back when you think you ’ve done with ‘ em , as sure as spring comes with the year .
An ’ I ’ve always had ways of hearin ’ about him . ”
She stood in the centre of a braided rug , and its rings of black and gray seemed to circle about her feet in the dim light .
Her height and massiveness in the low room gave her the look of a huge sibyl , while the strange fragrance of the mysterious herb blew in from the little garden .
BOOK ONE THE COMING OF THE MARTIANS CHAPTER ONE THE EVE OF THE WAR No one would have believed in the last years of the nineteenth century that this world was being watched keenly and closely by intelligences greater than man 's and yet as mortal as his own ; that as men busied themselves about their various concerns they were scrutinised and studied , perhaps almost as narrowly as a man with a microscope might scrutinise the transient creatures that swarm and multiply in a drop of water .
With infinite complacency men went to and fro over this globe about their little affairs , serene in their assurance of their empire over matter .
It is possible that the infusoria under the microscope do the same .
No one gave a thought to the older worlds of space as sources of human danger , or thought of them only to dismiss the idea of life upon them as impossible or improbable .
It is curious to recall some of the mental habits of those departed days .
At most terrestrial men fancied there might be other men upon Mars , perhaps inferior to themselves and ready to welcome a missionary enterprise .
Yet across the gulf of space , minds that are to our minds as ours are to those of the beasts that perish , intellects vast and cool and unsympathetic , regarded this earth with envious eyes , and slowly and surely drew their plans against us .
And early in the twentieth century came the great disillusionment .
The planet Mars , I scarcely need remind the reader , revolves about the sun at a mean distance of 140,000,000 miles , and the light and heat it receives from the sun is barely half of that received by this world .
It must be , if the nebular hypothesis has any truth , older than our world ; and long before this earth ceased to be molten , life upon its surface must have begun its course .
The fact that it is scarcely one seventh of the volume of the earth must have accelerated its cooling to the temperature at which life could begin .
It has air and water and all that is necessary for the support of animated existence .
Yet so vain is man , and so blinded by his vanity , that no writer , up to the very end of the nineteenth century , expressed any idea that intelligent life might have developed there far , or indeed at all , beyond its earthly level .
Nor was it generally understood that since Mars is older than our earth , with scarcely a quarter of the superficial area and remoter from the sun , it necessarily follows that it is not only more distant from time 's beginning but nearer its end .
The secular cooling that must someday overtake our planet has already gone far indeed with our neighbour .
Its physical condition is still largely a mystery , but we know now that even in its equatorial region the midday temperature barely approaches that of our coldest winter .
Its air is much more attenuated than ours , its oceans have shrunk until they cover but a third of its surface , and as its slow seasons change huge snowcaps gather and melt about either pole and periodically inundate its temperate zones .
That last stage of exhaustion , which to us is still incredibly remote , has become a present-day problem for the inhabitants of Mars .
The immediate pressure of necessity has brightened their intellects , enlarged their powers , and hardened their hearts .
And looking across space with instruments , and intelligences such as we have scarcely dreamed of , they see , at its nearest distance only 35,000,000 of miles sunward of them , a morning star of hope , our own warmer planet , green with vegetation and grey with water , with a cloudy atmosphere eloquent of fertility , with glimpses through its drifting cloud wisps of broad stretches of populous country and narrow , navy-crowded seas .
And we men , the creatures who inhabit this earth , must be to them at least as alien and lowly as are the monkeys and lemurs to us .
The intellectual side of man already admits that life is an incessant struggle for existence , and it would seem that this too is the belief of the minds upon Mars .
Their world is far gone in its cooling and this world is still crowded with life , but crowded only with what they regard as inferior animals .
To carry warfare sunward is , indeed , their only escape from the destruction that , generation after generation , creeps upon them .
And before we judge of them too harshly we must remember what ruthless and utter destruction our own species has wrought , not only upon animals , such as the vanished bison and the dodo , but upon its inferior races .
The Tasmanians , in spite of their human likeness , were entirely swept out of existence in a war of extermination waged by European immigrants , in the space of fifty years .
Are we such apostles of mercy as to complain if the Martians warred in the same spirit ?
The Martians seem to have calculated their descent with amazing subtlety -- their mathematical learning is evidently far in excess of ours -- and to have carried out their preparations with a well-nigh perfect unanimity .
Had our instruments permitted it , we might have seen the gathering trouble far back in the nineteenth century .
Men like Schiaparelli watched the red planet -- it is odd , by-the-bye , that for countless centuries Mars has been the star of war -- but failed to interpret the fluctuating appearances of the markings they mapped so well .
All that time the Martians must have been getting ready .
During the opposition of 1894 a great light was seen on the illuminated part of the disk , first at the Lick Observatory , then by Perrotin of Nice , and then by other observers .
English readers heard of it first in the issue of _ Nature _ dated August 2 .
I am inclined to think that this blaze may have been the casting of the huge gun , in the vast pit sunk into their planet , from which their shots were fired at us .
Peculiar markings , as yet unexplained , were seen near the site of that outbreak during the next two oppositions .
The storm burst upon us six years ago now .
As Mars approached opposition , Lavelle of Java set the wires of the astronomical exchange palpitating with the amazing intelligence of a huge outbreak of incandescent gas upon the planet .
It had occurred towards midnight of the twelfth ; and the spectroscope , to which he had at once resorted , indicated a mass of flaming gas , chiefly hydrogen , moving with an enormous velocity towards this earth .
This jet of fire had become invisible about a quarter past twelve .
He compared it to a colossal puff of flame suddenly and violently squirted out of the planet , " as flaming gases rushed out of a gun . "
A singularly appropriate phrase it proved .
Yet the next day there was nothing of this in the papers except a little note in the _ Daily Telegraph _ , and the world went in ignorance of one of the gravest dangers that ever threatened the human race .
I might not have heard of the eruption at all had I not met Ogilvy , the well-known astronomer , at Ottershaw .
He was immensely excited at the news , and in the excess of his feelings invited me up to take a turn with him that night in a scrutiny of the red planet .
In spite of all that has happened since , I still remember that vigil very distinctly : the black and silent observatory , the shadowed lantern throwing a feeble glow upon the floor in the corner , the steady ticking of the clockwork of the telescope , the little slit in the roof -- an oblong profundity with the stardust streaked across it .
Ogilvy moved about , invisible but audible .
Looking through the telescope , one saw a circle of deep blue and the little round planet swimming in the field .
It seemed such a little thing , so bright and small and still , faintly marked with transverse stripes , and slightly flattened from the perfect round .
But so little it was , so silvery warm -- a pin 's - head of light !
It was as if it quivered , but really this was the telescope vibrating with the activity of the clockwork that kept the planet in view .
As I watched , the planet seemed to grow larger and smaller and to advance and recede , but that was simply that my eye was tired .
Forty millions of miles it was from us -- more than forty millions of miles of void .
Few people realise the immensity of vacancy in which the dust of the material universe swims .
Near it in the field , I remember , were three faint points of light , three telescopic stars infinitely remote , and all around it was the unfathomable darkness of empty space .
You know how that blackness looks on a frosty starlight night .
In a telescope it seems far profounder .
And invisible to me because it was so remote and small , flying swiftly and steadily towards me across that incredible distance , drawing nearer every minute by so many thousands of miles , came the Thing they were sending us , the Thing that was to bring so much struggle and calamity and death to the earth .
I never dreamed of it then as I watched ; no one on earth dreamed of that unerring missile .
That night , too , there was another jetting out of gas from the distant planet .
I saw it .
A reddish flash at the edge , the slightest projection of the outline just as the chronometer struck midnight ; and at that I told Ogilvy and he took my place .
The night was warm and I was thirsty , and I went stretching my legs clumsily and feeling my way in the darkness , to the little table where the siphon stood , while Ogilvy exclaimed at the streamer of gas that came out towards us .
That night another invisible missile started on its way to the earth from Mars , just a second or so under twenty-four hours after the first one .
I remember how I sat on the table there in the blackness , with patches of green and crimson swimming before my eyes .
I wished I had a light to smoke by , little suspecting the meaning of the minute gleam I had seen and all that it would presently bring me .
Ogilvy watched till one , and then gave it up ; and we lit the lantern and walked over to his house .
Down below in the darkness were Ottershaw and Chertsey and all their hundreds of people , sleeping in peace .
He was full of speculation that night about the condition of Mars , and scoffed at the vulgar idea of its having inhabitants who were signalling us .
His idea was that meteorites might be falling in a heavy shower upon the planet , or that a huge volcanic explosion was in progress .
He pointed out to me how unlikely it was that organic evolution had taken the same direction in the two adjacent planets .
CHAPTER 1 Mrs Gildea had settled early to her morning 's work in what she called the veranda-study of her cottage in Leichardt 's Town .
It was a primitive cottage of the old style , standing in a garden and built on the cliff -- the Emu Point side -- overlooking the broad Leichardt River .
The veranda , quite twelve feet wide , ran -- Australian fashion -- along the front of the cottage , except for the two closed-in ends forming , one a bathroom and the other a kind of store closet .
Being raised a few feet above the ground , the veranda was enclosed by a wooden railing , and this and the supporting posts were twined with creepers that must have been planted at least thirty years .
One of these , a stephanotis , showed masses of white bloom , which Joan Gildea casually reflected would have fetched a pretty sum in Covent Garden , and , joining in with a fine-growing asparagus fern , formed an arch over the entrance steps .
The end of the veranda , where Mrs Gildea had established herself with her type-writer and paraphernalia of literary work , was screened by a thick-stemmed grape-vine , which made a dapple of shadow and sunshine upon the boarded floor .
Some bunches of late grapes -- it was the very beginning of March -- hung upon the vine , and , at the other end of the veranda , grew a passion creeper , its great purple fruit looking like huge plums amidst its vivid green leaves .
The roof of the veranda was low , with projecting eaves , below which a bunch of yellowing bananas hung to ripen .
In fact , the veranda and garden beyond would have been paradise to a fruitarian .
Against the wall of the store-room , stood a large tin dish piled with melons , pine-apples and miscellaneous garden produce , while , between the veranda posts , could be seen a guava-tree , an elderly fig and a loquat all in full bearing .
The garden seemed a tangle of all manner of vegetation -- an oleander in bloom , a poinsettia , a yucca , lifting its spike of waxen white blossoms , a narrow flower-border in which the gardenias had become tall shrubs and the scented verbena shrubs almost trees .
As for the blend of perfume , it was dreamily intoxicating .
Two bamboos , guarding the side entrance gate , made a soft whispering that heightened the dream-sense .
The bottom of the garden looked an inchoate mass of greenery topped by the upper boughs of tall straggling gum trees , growing outside where the ground fell gradually to the river .
From where Mrs Gildea sat , she had a view of almost the whole reach of the river where it circles Emu Point .
For , as is known to all who know Leichardt 's Town , the river winds in two great loops girdling two low points , so that , in striking a bee-line across the whole town , business and residential , one must cross the river three times .
Mrs Gildea could see the plan of the main street in the Middle Point and the roofs of shops and offices .
The busy wharves of the Leichardt 's Land Steam Navigation Company -- familiarly , the L.L.S.N. Co. -- lay opposite on her right , while leftward , across the water , she could trace , as far as the grape-vine would allow , the boundary of the Botanical Gardens and get a sight of the white stone and grey slate end of the big Parliamentary Buildings .
The heat-haze over the town and the brilliant sun-sparkles on the river suggested a cruel glare outside the shady veranda and over-grown old garden .
A pleasant study , if a bit distracting from its plenitude of associations to Australian-born Joan Gildea , who , on her marriage , had been transplanted into English soil , as care-free as a rose cut from the parent stem , and who now , after nearly twenty years , had returned to the scene of her youth -- a widow , a working journalist and shorn of most of her early illusions .
Her typewriter stood on a bamboo table before her .
A pile of Australian Hansards for reference sat on a chair at convenient distance .
A large table with a green cloth , at her elbow , had at one end a tray with the remains of her breakfast of tea , scones and fruit .
The end nearest her was littered with sheaves of manuscript , newspaper-cuttings , photographs and sepia sketches -- obviously for purposes of illustration : gum-bottle , stylographs and the rest , with , also , several note-books held open by bananas , recently plucked from the ripening bunch , to serve as paper-weights .
She had meant to be very busy that morning .
There was her weekly letter for THE IMPERIALIST to send off by to-morrow 's mail , and , moreover , she had to digest the reasons of the eminent journal for returning to her an article that had not met with the editor 's approval -- the great Gibbs : a potent newspaper-factor in the British policy of the day .
It had been an immense honour when Mr Gibbs had chosen Joan Gildea from amongst his staff for a roving commission to report upon the political , financial , economic and social aspects of Australia , and upon Imperial interests generally , as represented in various sideshows on her route .
But it happened that she was now suffering from a change at the last moment in that route -- a substitution of the commplace P. & O. for the more exciting Canadian Pacific , Mr Gibbs having suddenly decided that Imperialism in Australia demanded his special correspondent 's immediate attention .
For this story dates back to the time when Mr Joseph Chamberlain was in office ; when Imperialism , Free Trade and Yellow Labour were the catch words of a party , and before the great Australian Commonwealth had become an historical fact .
THE IMPERIALIST 's Special Correspondent looked worried .
She was wondering whether the English mail expected to-day would bring her troublesome editorial instructions .
She examined some of the photographs and drawings with a dissatisfied air .
A running inarticulate commentary might have been put into words like this : ' No good ... I can manage the letterpress all right once I get the hang of things .
But when it comes to illustrations , I ca n't make even a gum-tree look as if it was growing ... .
And Gibbs hates having amateur snapshots to work up ... .
Hopeless to try for a local artist ... .
I wonder if Colin McKeith could give me an idea .... .
Why to goodness did n't Biddy join me !
... .
If she 'd only had the decency to let me know in time WHY she could n't ... .
Money , I suppose -- or a Man !
... .
Well , I 'll write and tell her never to expect a literary leg-up from me again ... ' Mrs Gildea pulled the sheet she had been typing out of the machine , inserted another , altered the notch to single spacing and rattled off at top speed till the page was covered .
The she appended her signature and wrote this address : To the Lady Bridget O'Hara , Care of Eliza Countess of Gaverick , Upper Brook Street , London , W. on an envelope , into which she slipped her letter -- a letter never to be sent .
A snap of the gate between the bamboos added a metallic note to the tree 's reedy whimperings , and the postman tramped along the short garden path and up the veranda steps .
' Morning , Mrs Gildea ... a heavy mail for you ! '
He planked down the usual editorial packet -- two or three rolls of proofs , a collection of newspapers , a bulky parcel of private correspondence sent on by the porter of Mrs Gildea 's London flat , some local letters and , finally , two square envelopes , with the remark , as he turned away on his round .
' My word !
Mrs Gildea , those letters seem to have done a bit of globe-trotting on their own , do n't they ! '
For the envelopes were covered with directions , some in Japanese and Chinese hieroglyphics , some in official red ink from various postoffices , a few with the distinctive markings of British Legations and Government Houses where the Special Correspondent should have stayed , but did not -- Only her own name showing through the obliterations , and a final re-addressing by the Bank of Leichardt 's Land .
Mrs Gildea recognised the impulsive , untidy but characteristic handwriting of Lady Bridget O'Hara .
' From Biddy at last ! '
she exclaimed , tore the flap of number one letter , paused and laid it aside .
' Business first . '
So she went carefully through the editorial communication .
Mr Gibbs was not quite so tiresome as she had feared he would be .
After him , the packet from her London flat was inspected and its contents laid aside for future perusal .
Next , she tackled the local letters .
One was embossed with the Bank of Leichardt 's Land stamp and contained a cablegram originally despatched from Rome , which had been received at Vancouver and , thence , had pursued her -- first along the route originally designed , afterwards , with zigzagging , retrogression and much delay , along the one she had taken .
That it had reached her at all , said a good deal for Mrs Gildea 's fame as a freely paragraphed newspaper correspondent .
The telegram was phrased thus : SORRY IMPOSSIBLE NO FUNDS OTHER REASONS WRITING BIDDY Mrs Gildea 's illuminative ' H 'm ! '
implied that her two inductions had been correct .
No funds -- and other reasons -- meaning -- a MAN .
She scented instantly another of Biddy 's tempestuous love-affairs .
Had it been merely a question of lack of money with inclination goading , she felt pretty certain that Lady Bridget would have contrived to beg , borrow or steal -- on a hazardous promissory note , after the happy-go-lucky financial morals of that section of society to which by birth she belonged .
Or , failing these means , that she would have threatened some mad enterprise and so have frightened her aunt Eliza Countess of Gaverick into writing a cheque for three figures .
Of course , less would have been of no account .
Mrs Gildea opened the two envelopes and sorted the pages in order of their dates .
The first had the address of a house in South Belgravia , where lived Sir Luke Tallant of the Colonial Office and Rosamond his wife -- distant connections of the Gavericks .
Lady Bridget 's letters were type-written , most carelessly , with the mistakes corrected down the margin of the flimsy sheets in the manner of author 's proof -- the whole appearance of them suggesting literary ' copy ' .
Likewise , the slapdash epistolary style of the MS. , which had a certain vividness of its own .
CHAPTER 2 ' Dearest Joan , You 'll have got my wire .
Vancouver was right , I suppose .
I sent it from Rome .
Since then I have been at Montreux with Chris and Molly , and since I came back to England with them , I 've been in too chaotic a state of mind to write letters .
Really , Chris and Molly 's atmosphere of struggling to keep in the swim on next to nothing a year and of eking out a precarious income by visits to second-rate country houses and cadging on their London friends gets on my nerves to such an extent that Luke and Rosamond 's established " Colonial Office " sort of respectability is quite refreshing by contrast .
_ Chapter I _ Miss Marjoribanks lost her mother when she was only fifteen , and when , to add to the misfortune , she was absent at school , and could not have it in her power to soothe her dear mamma 's last moments , as she herself said .
Words are sometimes very poor exponents of such an event : but it happens now and then , on the other hand , that a plain intimation expresses too much , and suggests emotion and suffering which , in reality , have but little , if any , existence .
Mrs Marjoribanks , poor lady , had been an invalid for many years ; she had grown a little peevish in her loneliness , not feeling herself of much account in this world .
There are some rare natures that are content to acquiesce in the general neglect , and forget themselves when they find themselves forgotten ; but it is unfortunately much more usual to take the plan adopted by Mrs Marjoribanks , who devoted all her powers , during the last ten years of her life , to the solacement and care of that poor self which other people neglected .
The consequence was , that when she disappeared from her sofa -- except for the mere physical fact that she was no longer there -- no one , except her maid , whose occupation was gone , could have found out much difference .
Her husband , it is true , who had , somewhere , hidden deep in some secret corner of his physical organisation , the remains of a heart , experienced a certain sentiment of sadness when he re-entered the house from which she had gone away for ever .
But Dr Marjoribanks was too busy a man to waste his feelings on a mere sentiment .
His daughter , however , was only fifteen , and had floods of tears at her command , as was natural at that age .
All the way home she revolved the situation in her mind , which was considerably enlightened by novels and popular philosophy -- for the lady at the head of Miss Marjoribanks school was a devoted admirer of _ Friends in Council _ , and was fond of bestowing that work as a prize , with pencil-marks on the margin -- so that Lucilla 's mind had been cultivated , and was brimful of the best of sentiments .
She made up her mind on her journey to a great many virtuous resolutions ; for , in such a case as hers , it was evidently the duty of an only child to devote herself to her father 's comfort , and become the sunshine of his life , as so many young persons of her age have been known to become in literature .
Miss Marjoribanks had a lively mind , and was capable of grasping all the circumstances of the situation at a glance .
Thus , between the outbreaks of her tears for her mother , it became apparent to her that she must sacrifice her own feelings , and make a cheerful home for papa , and that a great many changes would be necessary in the household -- changes which went so far as even to extend to the furniture .
Miss Marjoribanks sketched to herself , as she lay back in the corner of the railway carriage , with her veil down , how she would wind herself up to the duty of presiding at her papa 's dinner-parties , and charming everybody by her good humour , and brightness , and devotion to his comfort ; and how , when it was all over , she would withdraw and cry her eyes out in her own room , and be found in the morning languid and worn-out , but always heroical , ready to go downstairs and assist at dear papa 's breakfast , and keep up her smiles for him till he had gone out to his patients .
Altogether the picture was a very pretty one ; and , considering that a great many young ladies in deep mourning put force upon their feelings in novels , and maintain a smile for the benefit of the unobservant male creatures of whom they have the charge , the idea was not at all extravagant , considering that Miss Marjoribanks was but fifteen .
She was not , however , exactly the kind of figure for this _ mise en scène _ .
When her schoolfellows talked of her to their friends -- for Lucilla was already an important personage at Mount Pleasant -- the most common description they gave her was , that she was " a large girl " ; and there was great truth in the adjective .
She was not to be described as a tall girl -- which conveys an altogether different idea -- but she was large in all particulars , full and well-developed , with somewhat large features , not at all pretty as yet , though it was known in Mount Pleasant that somebody had said that such a face might ripen into beauty , and become " grandiose , " for anything anybody could tell .
Miss Marjoribanks was not vain ; but the word had taken possession of her imagination , as was natural , and solaced her much when she made the painful discovery that her gloves were half a number larger , and her shoes a hair-breadth broader , than those of any of her companions ; but the hands and feet were both perfectly well shaped ; and being at the same time well clothed and plump , were much more presentable and pleasant to look upon than the lean rudimentary schoolgirl hands with which they were surrounded .
To add to these excellences , Lucilla had a mass of hair which , if it could but have been cleared a little in its tint , would have been golden , though at present it was nothing more than tawny , and curly to exasperation .
She wore it in large thick curls , which did not , however , float or wave , or do any of the graceful things which curls ought to do ; for it had this aggravating quality , that it would not grow long , but would grow ridiculously , unmanageably thick , to the admiration of her companions , but to her own despair , for there was no knowing what to do with those short but ponderous locks .
These were the external characteristics of the girl who was going home to be a comfort to her widowed father , and meant to sacrifice herself to his happiness .
In the course of her rapid journey she had already settled upon everything that had to be done ; or rather , to speak truly , had rehearsed everything , according to the habit already acquired by a quick mind , a good deal occupied with itself .
First , she meant to fall into her father 's arms -- forgetting , with that singular facility for overlooking the peculiarities of others which belongs to such a character , that Dr Marjoribanks was very little given to embracing , and that a hasty kiss on her forehead was the warmest caress he had ever given his daughter -- and then to rush up to the chamber of death and weep over dear mamma .
" And to think I was not there to soothe her last moments ! "
Lucilla said to herself , with a sob , and with feelings sufficiently real in their way .
After this , the devoted daughter made up her mind to come downstairs again , pale as death , but self-controlled , and devote herself to papa .
Perhaps , if great emotion should make him tearless , as such cases had been known , Miss Marjoribanks would steal into his arms unawares , and so surprise him into weeping .
All this went briskly through her mind , undeterred by the reflection that tears were as much out of the Doctor 's way as embraces ; and in this mood she sped swiftly along in the inspiration of her first sorrow , as she imagined , but in reality to suffer her first disappointment , which was of a less soothing character than that mild and manageable grief .
When Miss Marjoribanks reached home her mother had been dead for twenty-four hours ; and her father was not at the door to receive her as she had expected , but by the bedside of a patient in extremity , who could not consent to go out of the world without the Doctor .
This was a sad reversal of her intentions , but Lucilla was not the woman to be disconcerted .
She carried out the second part of her programme without either interference or sympathy , except from Mrs Marjoribanks 's maid , who had some hopes from the moment of her arrival .
" I ca n't abear to think as I 'm to be parted from you all , miss , " sobbed the faithful attendant .
" I 've lost the best missus as ever was , and I should n't mind going after her .
Whenever any one gets a good friend in this world , they 're the first to be took away , " said the weeping handmaiden , who naturally saw her own loss in the most vivid light .
" Ah , Ellis , " cried Miss Marjoribanks , reposing her sorrow in the arms of this anxious attendant , " we must try to be a comfort to poor papa ! "
With this end Lucilla made herself very troublesome to the sober-minded Doctor during those few dim days before the faint and daily lessening shadow of poor Mrs Marjoribanks was removed altogether from the house .
When that sad ceremony had taken place , and the Doctor returned , serious enough , Heaven knows , to the great house , where the faded helpless woman , who had notwithstanding been his love and his bride in other days , lay no longer on the familiar sofa , the crisis arrived which Miss Marjoribanks had rehearsed so often , but after quite a different fashion .
The widower was tearless , indeed , but not from excess of emotion .
On the contrary , a painful heaviness possessed him when he became aware how little real sorrow was in his mind , and how small an actual loss was this loss of his wife , which bulked before the world as an event of just as much magnitude as the loss , for example , which poor Mr Lake , the drawing-master , was at the same moment suffering .
It was even sad , in another point of view , to think of a human creature passing out of the world , and leaving so little trace that she had ever been there .
As for the pretty creature whom Dr Marjoribanks had married , she had vanished into thin air years and years ago .
These thoughts were heavy enough -- perhaps even more overwhelming than that grief which develops love to its highest point of intensity .
But such were not precisely the kind of reflections which could be solaced by paternal _ attendrissement _ over a weeping and devoted daughter .
It was May , and the weather was warm for the season ; but Lucilla had caused the fire to be lighted in the large gloomy library where Dr Marjoribanks always sat in the evenings , with the idea that it would be " a comfort " to him ; and , for the same reason , she had ordered tea to be served there , instead of the dinner , for which her father , as she imagined , could have little appetite .
When the Doctor went in to his favourite seclusion , tired and heated and sad -- for even on the day of his wife 's funeral the favourite doctor of Carlingford had patients to think of -- the very heaviness of his thoughts gave warmth to his indignation .
He had longed for the quiet and the coolness and the solitude of his library , apart from everybody ; and when he found it radiant with firelight , tea set on the table , and Lucilla crying by the fire , in her new crape , the effect upon a temper by no means perfect may be imagined .
The unfortunate man threw both the windows wide open and rang the bell violently , and gave instant orders for the removal of the unnecessary fire and the tea-service .
" Let me know when dinner is ready , " he said , in a voice like thunder ; " and if Miss Marjoribanks wants a fire , let it be lighted in the drawing-room . "
Lucilla was so much taken by surprise by this sudden overthrow of her programme , that she submitted , as a girl of much less spirit might have done , and suffered herself and her fire and her tea-things to be dismissed upstairs , where she wept still more at sight of dear mamma 's sofa , and where Ellis came to mingle her tears with those of her young mistress , and to beg dear Miss Lucilla , for the sake of her precious ' elth and her dear papa , to be persuaded to take some tea .
On the whole , master stood lessened in the eyes of all the household by his ability to eat his dinner , and his resentment at having his habitudes disturbed .
" Them men would eat and drink if we was all in our graves , " said the indignant cook , who indeed had a real grievance ; and the outraged sentiment of the kitchen was avenged by a bad and hasty dinner , which the Doctor , though generally " very particular , " swallowed without remark .
About an hour afterwards he went upstairs to the drawing-room , where Miss Marjoribanks was waiting for him , much less at ease than she had expected to be .
Though he gave a little sigh at the sight of his wife 's sofa , he did not hesitate to sit down upon it , and even to draw it a little out of its position , which , as Lucilla described afterwards , was like a knife going into her heart .
Though , indeed , she had herself decided already , in the intervals of her tears , that the drawing-room furniture had got very faded and shabby , and that it would be very expedient to have it renewed for the new reign of youth and energy which was about to commence .
As for the Doctor , though Miss Marjoribanks thought him insensible , his heart was heavy enough .
His wife had gone out of the world without leaving the least mark of her existence , except in that large girl , whose spirits and forces were unbounded , but whose discretion at the present moment did not seem much greater than her mother 's .
Instead of thinking of her as a comfort , the Doctor felt himself called upon to face a new and unexpected embarrassment .
It would have been a satisfaction to him just then to have been left to himself , and permitted to work on quietly at his profession , and to write his papers for the _ Lancet _ , and to see his friends now and then when he chose ; for Dr Marjoribanks was not a man who had any great need of sympathy by nature , or who was at all addicted to demonstrations of feeling ; consequently , he drew his wife 's sofa a little farther from the fire , and took his seat on it soberly , quite unaware that , by so doing , he was putting a knife into his daughter 's heart .
FOUND AMONG THE PAPERS OF THE LATE DIEDRICH KNICKERBOCKER .
A pleasing land of drowsy head it was , Of dreams that wave before the half-shut eye ; And of gay castles in the clouds that pass , Forever flushing round a summer sky .
CASTLE OF INDOLENCE .
In the bosom of one of those spacious coves which indent the eastern shore of the Hudson , at that broad expansion of the river denominated by the ancient Dutch navigators the Tappan Zee , and where they always prudently shortened sail and implored the protection of St. Nicholas when they crossed , there lies a small market town or rural port , which by some is called Greensburgh , but which is more generally and properly known by the name of Tarry Town .
This name was given , we are told , in former days , by the good housewives of the adjacent country , from the inveterate propensity of their husbands to linger about the village tavern on market days .
Be that as it may , I do not vouch for the fact , but merely advert to it , for the sake of being precise and authentic .
Not far from this village , perhaps about two miles , there is a little valley or rather lap of land among high hills , which is one of the quietest places in the whole world .
A small brook glides through it , with just murmur enough to lull one to repose ; and the occasional whistle of a quail or tapping of a woodpecker is almost the only sound that ever breaks in upon the uniform tranquillity .
I recollect that , when a stripling , my first exploit in squirrel-shooting was in a grove of tall walnut-trees that shades one side of the valley .
I had wandered into it at noontime , when all nature is peculiarly quiet , and was startled by the roar of my own gun , as it broke the Sabbath stillness around and was prolonged and reverberated by the angry echoes .
If ever I should wish for a retreat whither I might steal from the world and its distractions , and dream quietly away the remnant of a troubled life , I know of none more promising than this little valley .
From the listless repose of the place , and the peculiar character of its inhabitants , who are descendants from the original Dutch settlers , this sequestered glen has long been known by the name of SLEEPY HOLLOW , and its rustic lads are called the Sleepy Hollow Boys throughout all the neighboring country .
A drowsy , dreamy influence seems to hang over the land , and to pervade the very atmosphere .
Some say that the place was bewitched by a High German doctor , during the early days of the settlement ; others , that an old Indian chief , the prophet or wizard of his tribe , held his powwows there before the country was discovered by Master Hendrick Hudson .
Certain it is , the place still continues under the sway of some witching power , that holds a spell over the minds of the good people , causing them to walk in a continual reverie .
They are given to all kinds of marvellous beliefs , are subject to trances and visions , and frequently see strange sights , and hear music and voices in the air .
The whole neighborhood abounds with local tales , haunted spots , and twilight superstitions ; stars shoot and meteors glare oftener across the valley than in any other part of the country , and the nightmare , with her whole ninefold , seems to make it the favorite scene of her gambols .
The dominant spirit , however , that haunts this enchanted region , and seems to be commander-in-chief of all the powers of the air , is the apparition of a figure on horseback , without a head .
It is said by some to be the ghost of a Hessian trooper , whose head had been carried away by a cannon-ball , in some nameless battle during the Revolutionary War , and who is ever and anon seen by the country folk hurrying along in the gloom of night , as if on the wings of the wind .
His haunts are not confined to the valley , but extend at times to the adjacent roads , and especially to the vicinity of a church at no great distance .
Indeed , certain of the most authentic historians of those parts , who have been careful in collecting and collating the floating facts concerning this spectre , allege that the body of the trooper having been buried in the churchyard , the ghost rides forth to the scene of battle in nightly quest of his head , and that the rushing speed with which he sometimes passes along the Hollow , like a midnight blast , is owing to his being belated , and in a hurry to get back to the churchyard before daybreak .
Such is the general purport of this legendary superstition , which has furnished materials for many a wild story in that region of shadows ; and the spectre is known at all the country firesides , by the name of the Headless Horseman of Sleepy Hollow .
It is remarkable that the visionary propensity I have mentioned is not confined to the native inhabitants of the valley , but is unconsciously imbibed by every one who resides there for a time .
However wide awake they may have been before they entered that sleepy region , they are sure , in a little time , to inhale the witching influence of the air , and begin to grow imaginative , to dream dreams , and see apparitions .
I mention this peaceful spot with all possible laud , for it is in such little retired Dutch valleys , found here and there embosomed in the great State of New York , that population , manners , and customs remain fixed , while the great torrent of migration and improvement , which is making such incessant changes in other parts of this restless country , sweeps by them unobserved .
They are like those little nooks of still water , which border a rapid stream , where we may see the straw and bubble riding quietly at anchor , or slowly revolving in their mimic harbor , undisturbed by the rush of the passing current .
Though many years have elapsed since I trod the drowsy shades of Sleepy Hollow , yet I question whether I should not still find the same trees and the same families vegetating in its sheltered bosom .
In this by-place of nature there abode , in a remote period of American history , that is to say , some thirty years since , a worthy wight of the name of Ichabod Crane , who sojourned , or , as he expressed it , “ tarried , ” in Sleepy Hollow , for the purpose of instructing the children of the vicinity .
He was a native of Connecticut , a State which supplies the Union with pioneers for the mind as well as for the forest , and sends forth yearly its legions of frontier woodmen and country schoolmasters .
The cognomen of Crane was not inapplicable to his person .
He was tall , but exceedingly lank , with narrow shoulders , long arms and legs , hands that dangled a mile out of his sleeves , feet that might have served for shovels , and his whole frame most loosely hung together .
His head was small , and flat at top , with huge ears , large green glassy eyes , and a long snipe nose , so that it looked like a weather-cock perched upon his spindle neck to tell which way the wind blew .
To see him striding along the profile of a hill on a windy day , with his clothes bagging and fluttering about him , one might have mistaken him for the genius of famine descending upon the earth , or some scarecrow eloped from a cornfield .
His schoolhouse was a low building of one large room , rudely constructed of logs ; the windows partly glazed , and partly patched with leaves of old copybooks .
It was most ingeniously secured at vacant hours , by a withe twisted in the handle of the door , and stakes set against the window shutters ; so that though a thief might get in with perfect ease , he would find some embarrassment in getting out , -- an idea most probably borrowed by the architect , Yost Van Houten , from the mystery of an eelpot .
The schoolhouse stood in a rather lonely but pleasant situation , just at the foot of a woody hill , with a brook running close by , and a formidable birch-tree growing at one end of it .
From hence the low murmur of his pupils ’ voices , conning over their lessons , might be heard in a drowsy summer ’s day , like the hum of a beehive ; interrupted now and then by the authoritative voice of the master , in the tone of menace or command , or , peradventure , by the appalling sound of the birch , as he urged some tardy loiterer along the flowery path of knowledge .
Truth to say , he was a conscientious man , and ever bore in mind the golden maxim , “ Spare the rod and spoil the child . ”
Ichabod Crane ’s scholars certainly were not spoiled .
I would not have it imagined , however , that he was one of those cruel potentates of the school who joy in the smart of their subjects ; on the contrary , he administered justice with discrimination rather than severity ; taking the burden off the backs of the weak , and laying it on those of the strong .
Your mere puny stripling , that winced at the least flourish of the rod , was passed by with indulgence ; but the claims of justice were satisfied by inflicting a double portion on some little tough wrong-headed , broad-skirted Dutch urchin , who sulked and swelled and grew dogged and sullen beneath the birch .
All this he called “ doing his duty by their parents ; ” and he never inflicted a chastisement without following it by the assurance , so consolatory to the smarting urchin , that “ he would remember it and thank him for it the longest day he had to live . ”
When school hours were over , he was even the companion and playmate of the larger boys ; and on holiday afternoons would convoy some of the smaller ones home , who happened to have pretty sisters , or good housewives for mothers , noted for the comforts of the cupboard .
Indeed , it behooved him to keep on good terms with his pupils .
The revenue arising from his school was small , and would have been scarcely sufficient to furnish him with daily bread , for he was a huge feeder , and , though lank , had the dilating powers of an anaconda ; but to help out his maintenance , he was , according to country custom in those parts , boarded and lodged at the houses of the farmers whose children he instructed .
With these he lived successively a week at a time , thus going the rounds of the neighborhood , with all his worldly effects tied up in a cotton handkerchief .
That all this might not be too onerous on the purses of his rustic patrons , who are apt to consider the costs of schooling a grievous burden , and schoolmasters as mere drones , he had various ways of rendering himself both useful and agreeable .
He assisted the farmers occasionally in the lighter labors of their farms , helped to make hay , mended the fences , took the horses to water , drove the cows from pasture , and cut wood for the winter fire .
He laid aside , too , all the dominant dignity and absolute sway with which he lorded it in his little empire , the school , and became wonderfully gentle and ingratiating .
He found favor in the eyes of the mothers by petting the children , particularly the youngest ; and like the lion bold , which whilom so magnanimously the lamb did hold , he would sit with a child on one knee , and rock a cradle with his foot for whole hours together .
Chapter 1 Once upon a time and a very good time it was there was a moocow coming down along the road and this moocow that was coming down along the road met a nicens little boy named baby tuckoo ... His father told him that story : his father looked at him through a glass : he had a hairy face .
He was baby tuckoo .
The moocow came down the road where Betty Byrne lived : she sold lemon platt .
O , the wild rose blossoms On the little green place .
He sang that song .
That was his song .
O , the green wothe botheth .
When you wet the bed first it is warm then it gets cold .
His mother put on the oilsheet .
That had the queer smell .
His mother had a nicer smell than his father .
She played on the piano the sailor 's hornpipe for him to dance .
He danced : Tralala lala , Tralala tralaladdy , Tralala lala , Tralala lala .
Uncle Charles and Dante clapped .
They were older than his father and mother but uncle Charles was older than Dante .
Dante had two brushes in her press .
The brush with the maroon velvet back was for Michael Davitt and the brush with the green velvet back was for Parnell .
Dante gave him a cachou every time he brought her a piece of tissue paper .
The Vances lived in number seven .
They had a different father and mother .
They were Eileen 's father and mother .
When they were grown up he was going to marry Eileen .
He hid under the table .
His mother said : -- O , Stephen will apologize .
Dante said : -- O , if not , the eagles will come and pull out his eyes .
-- Pull out his eyes , Apologize , Apologize , Pull out his eyes .
Apologize , Pull out his eyes , Pull out his eyes , Apologize .
* * * * * The wide playgrounds were swarming with boys .
All were shouting and the prefects urged them on with strong cries .
The evening air was pale and chilly and after every charge and thud of the footballers the greasy leather orb flew like a heavy bird through the grey light .
He kept on the fringe of his line , out of sight of his prefect , out of the reach of the rude feet , feigning to run now and then .
He felt his body small and weak amid the throng of the players and his eyes were weak and watery .
Rody Kickham was not like that : he would be captain of the third line all the fellows said .
Rody Kickham was a decent fellow but Nasty Roche was a stink .
Rody Kickham had greaves in his number and a hamper in the refectory .
Nasty Roche had big hands .
He called the Friday pudding dog-in-the-blanket .
And one day he had asked : -- What is your name ?
Stephen had answered : Stephen Dedalus .
Then Nasty Roche had said : -- What kind of a name is that ?
And when Stephen had not been able to answer Nasty Roche had asked : -- What is your father ?
Stephen had answered : -- A gentleman .
Then Nasty Roche had asked : -- Is he a magistrate ?
He crept about from point to point on the fringe of his line , making little runs now and then .
But his hands were bluish with cold .
He kept his hands in the side pockets of his belted grey suit .
That was a belt round his pocket .
And belt was also to give a fellow a belt .
One day a fellow said to Cantwell : -- I 'd give you such a belt in a second .
Cantwell had answered : -- Go and fight your match .
Give Cecil Thunder a belt .
I 'd like to see you .
He 'd give you a toe in the rump for yourself .
That was not a nice expression .
His mother had told him not to speak with the rough boys in the college .
Nice mother !
The first day in the hall of the castle when she had said goodbye she had put up her veil double to her nose to kiss him : and her nose and eyes were red .
But he had pretended not to see that she was going to cry .
She was a nice mother but she was not so nice when she cried .
And his father had given him two five-shilling pieces for pocket money .
And his father had told him if he wanted anything to write home to him and , whatever he did , never to peach on a fellow .
Then at the door of the castle the rector had shaken hands with his father and mother , his soutane fluttering in the breeze , and the car had driven off with his father and mother on it .
They had cried to him from the car , waving their hands : -- Goodbye , Stephen , goodbye !
-- Goodbye , Stephen , goodbye !
He was caught in the whirl of a scrimmage and , fearful of the flashing eyes and muddy boots , bent down to look through the legs .
The fellows were struggling and groaning and their legs were rubbing and kicking and stamping .
Then Jack Lawton 's yellow boots dodged out the ball and all the other boots and legs ran after .
He ran after them a little way and then stopped .
It was useless to run on .
Soon they would be going home for the holidays .
After supper in the study hall he would change the number pasted up inside his desk from seventy-seven to seventy-six .
It would be better to be in the study hall than out there in the cold .
The sky was pale and cold but there were lights in the castle .
He wondered from which window Hamilton Rowan had thrown his hat on the ha-ha and had there been flowerbeds at that time under the windows .
One day when he had been called to the castle the butler had shown him the marks of the soldiers ' slugs in the wood of the door and had given him a piece of shortbread that the community ate .
It was nice and warm to see the lights in the castle .
It was like something in a book .
Perhaps Leicester Abbey was like that .
And there were nice sentences in Doctor Cornwell 's Spelling Book .
They were like poetry but they were only sentences to learn the spelling from .
Wolsey died in Leicester Abbey Where the abbots buried him .
Canker is a disease of plants , Cancer one of animals .
It would be nice to lie on the hearthrug before the fire , leaning his head upon his hands , and think on those sentences .
He shivered as if he had cold slimy water next his skin .
That was mean of Wells to shoulder him into the square ditch because he would not swop his little snuff box for Wells 's seasoned hacking chestnut , the conqueror of forty .
How cold and slimy the water had been !
A fellow had once seen a big rat jump into the scum .
Mother was sitting at the fire with Dante waiting for Brigid to bring in the tea .
She had her feet on the fender and her jewelly slippers were so hot and they had such a lovely warm smell !
Dante knew a lot of things .
She had taught him where the Mozambique Channel was and what was the longest river in America and what was the name of the highest mountain in the moon .
Father Arnall knew more than Dante because he was a priest but both his father and uncle Charles said that Dante was a clever woman and a well-read woman .
And when Dante made that noise after dinner and then put up her hand to her mouth : that was heartburn .
A voice cried far out on the playground : -- All in !
Then other voices cried from the lower and third lines : -- All in !
All in !
The players closed around , flushed and muddy , and he went among them , glad to go in .
Rody Kickham held the ball by its greasy lace .
A fellow asked him to give it one last : but he walked on without even answering the fellow .
Simon Moonan told him not to because the prefect was looking .
The fellow turned to Simon Moonan and said : -- We all know why you speak .
You are McGlade 's suck .
Suck was a queer word .
The fellow called Simon Moonan that name because Simon Moonan used to tie the prefect 's false sleeves behind his back and the prefect used to let on to be angry .
But the sound was ugly .
Once he had washed his hands in the lavatory of the Wicklow Hotel and his father pulled the stopper up by the chain after and the dirty water went down through the hole in the basin .
And when it had all gone down slowly the hole in the basin had made a sound like that : suck .
Only louder .
To remember that and the white look of the lavatory made him feel cold and then hot .
There were two cocks that you turned and water came out : cold and hot .
He felt cold and then a little hot : and he could see the names printed on the cocks .
That was a very queer thing .
And the air in the corridor chilled him too .
It was queer and wettish .
But soon the gas would be lit and in burning it made a light noise like a little song .
Always the same : and when the fellows stopped talking in the playroom you could hear it .
It was the hour for sums .
Father Arnall wrote a hard sum on the board and then said : -- Now then , who will win ?
Go ahead , York !
Go ahead , Lancaster !
Stephen tried his best , but the sum was too hard and he felt confused .
The little silk badge with the white rose on it that was pinned on the breast of his jacket began to flutter .
He was no good at sums , but he tried his best so that York might not lose .
Father Arnall 's face looked very black , but he was not in a wax : he was laughing .
Then Jack Lawton cracked his fingers and Father Arnall looked at his copybook and said : -- Right .
Bravo Lancaster !
The red rose wins .
Come on now , York !
Forge ahead !
Jack Lawton looked over from his side .
The little silk badge with the red rose on it looked very rich because he had a blue sailor top on .
Stephen felt his own face red too , thinking of all the bets about who would get first place in elements , Jack Lawton or he .
Some weeks Jack Lawton got the card for first and some weeks he got the card for first .
His white silk badge fluttered and fluttered as he worked at the next sum and heard Father Arnall 's voice .
Then all his eagerness passed away and he felt his face quite cool .
He thought his face must be white because it felt so cool .
He could not get out the answer for the sum but it did not matter .
White roses and red roses : those were beautiful colours to think of .
And the cards for first place and second place and third place were beautiful colours too : pink and cream and lavender .
Lavender and cream and pink roses were beautiful to think of .
Perhaps a wild rose might be like those colours and he remembered the song about the wild rose blossoms on the little green place .
But you could not have a green rose .
But perhaps somewhere in the world you could .
CHAPTER I ' HASTE TO THE WEDDING ' ' Wooed and married and a ' . '
' Edith ! '
said Margaret , gently , ' Edith ! '
But , as Margaret half suspected , Edith had fallen asleep .
She lay curled up on the sofa in the back drawing-room in Harley Street , looking very lovely in her white muslin and blue ribbons .
If Titania had ever been dressed in white muslin and blue ribbons , and had fallen asleep on a crimson damask sofa in a back drawing-room , Edith might have been taken for her .
Margaret was struck afresh by her cousin 's beauty .
They had grown up together from childhood , and all along Edith had been remarked upon by every one , except Margaret , for her prettiness ; but Margaret had never thought about it until the last few days , when the prospect of soon losing her companion seemed to give force to every sweet quality and charm which Edith possessed .
They had been talking about wedding dresses , and wedding ceremonies ; and Captain Lennox , and what he had told Edith about her future life at Corfu , where his regiment was stationed ; and the difficulty of keeping a piano in good tune ( a difficulty which Edith seemed to consider as one of the most formidable that could befall her in her married life ) , and what gowns she should want in the visits to Scotland , which would immediately succeed her marriage ; but the whispered tone had latterly become more drowsy ; and Margaret , after a pause of a few minutes , found , as she fancied , that in spite of the buzz in the next room , Edith had rolled herself up into a soft ball of muslin and ribbon , and silken curls , and gone off into a peaceful little after-dinner nap .
Margaret had been on the point of telling her cousin of some of the plans and visions which she entertained as to her future life in the country parsonage , where her father and mother lived ; and where her bright holidays had always been passed , though for the last ten years her aunt Shaw 's house had been considered as her home .
But in default of a listener , she had to brood over the change in her life silently as heretofore .
It was a happy brooding , although tinged with regret at being separated for an indefinite time from her gentle aunt and dear cousin .
As she thought of the delight of filling the important post of only daughter in Helstone parsonage , pieces of the conversation out of the next room came upon her ears .
Her aunt Shaw was talking to the five or six ladies who had been dining there , and whose husbands were still in the dining-room .
They were the familiar acquaintances of the house ; neighbours whom Mrs. Shaw called friends , because she happened to dine with them more frequently than with any other people , and because if she or Edith wanted anything from them , or they from her , they did not scruple to make a call at each other 's houses before luncheon .
These ladies and their husbands were invited , in their capacity of friends , to eat a farewell dinner in honour of Edith 's approaching marriage .
Edith had rather objected to this arrangement , for Captain Lennox was expected to arrive by a late train this very evening ; but , although she was a spoiled child , she was too careless and idle to have a very strong will of her own , and gave way when she found that her mother had absolutely ordered those extra delicacies of the season which are always supposed to be efficacious against immoderate grief at farewell dinners .
She contented herself by leaning back in her chair , merely playing with the food on her plate , and looking grave and absent ; while all around her were enjoying the mots of Mr. Grey , the gentleman who always took the bottom of the table at Mrs. Shaw 's dinner parties , and asked Edith to give them some music in the drawing-room .
Mr. Grey was particularly agreeable over this farewell dinner , and the gentlemen staid down stairs longer than usual .
It was very well they did -- to judge from the fragments of conversation which Margaret overheard . '
I suffered too much myself ; not that I was not extremely happy with the poor dear General , but still disparity of age is a drawback ; one that I was resolved Edith should not have to encounter .
Of course , without any maternal partiality , I foresaw that the dear child was likely to marry early ; indeed , I had often said that I was sure she would be married before she was nineteen .
I had quite a prophetic feeling when Captain Lennox ' -- and here the voice dropped into a whisper , but Margaret could easily supply the blank .
The course of true love in Edith 's case had run remarkably smooth .
Mrs. Shaw had given way to the presentiment , as she expressed it ; and had rather urged on the marriage , although it was below the expectations which many of Edith 's acquaintances had formed for her , a young and pretty heiress .
But Mrs. Shaw said that her only child should marry for love , -- and sighed emphatically , as if love had not been her motive for marrying the General .
Mrs. Shaw enjoyed the romance of the present engagement rather more than her daughter .
Not but that Edith was very thoroughly and properly in love ; still she would certainly have preferred a good house in Belgravia , to all the picturesqueness of the life which Captain Lennox described at Corfu .
The very parts which made Margaret glow as she listened , Edith pretended to shiver and shudder at ; partly for the pleasure she had in being coaxed out of her dislike by her fond lover , and partly because anything of a gipsy or make-shift life was really distasteful to her .
Yet had any one come with a fine house , and a fine estate , and a fine title to boot , Edith would still have clung to Captain Lennox while the temptation lasted ; when it was over , it is possible she might have had little qualms of ill-concealed regret that Captain Lennox could not have united in his person everything that was desirable .
In this she was but her mother 's child ; who , after deliberately marrying General Shaw with no warmer feeling than respect for his character and establishment , was constantly , though quietly , bemoaning her hard lot in being united to one whom she could not love . '
I have spared no expense in her trousseau , ' were the next words Margaret heard .
' She has all the beautiful Indian shawls and scarfs the General gave to me , but which I shall never wear again . '
' She is a lucky girl , ' replied another voice , which Margaret knew to be that of Mrs. Gibson , a lady who was taking a double interest in the conversation , from the fact of one of her daughters having been married within the last few weeks .
' Helen had set her heart upon an Indian shawl , but really when I found what an extravagant price was asked , I was obliged to refuse her .
She will be quite envious when she hears of Edith having Indian shawls .
What kind are they ?
Delhi ?
with the lovely little borders ? '
Margaret heard her aunt 's voice again , but this time it was as if she had raised herself up from her half-recumbent position , and were looking into the more dimly lighted back drawing-room .
' Edith !
Edith ! '
cried she ; and then she sank as if wearied by the exertion .
Margaret stepped forward .
' Edith is asleep , Aunt Shaw .
Is it anything I can do ? '
All the ladies said ' Poor child ! '
on receiving this distressing intelligence about Edith ; and the minute lap-dog in Mrs. Shaw 's arms began to bark , as if excited by the burst of pity .
' Hush , Tiny !
you naughty little girl !
you will waken your mistress .
It was only to ask Edith if she would tell Newton to bring down her shawls : perhaps you would go , Margaret dear ? '
Margaret went up into the old nursery at the very top of the house , where Newton was busy getting up some laces which were required for the wedding .
While Newton went ( not without a muttered grumbling ) to undo the shawls , which had already been exhibited four or five times that day , Margaret looked round upon the nursery ; the first room in that house with which she had become familiar nine years ago , when she was brought , all untamed from the forest , to share the home , the play , and the lessons of her cousin Edith .
She remembered the dark , dim look of the London nursery , presided over by an austere and ceremonious nurse , who was terribly particular about clean hands and torn frocks .
She recollected the first tea up there -- separate from her father and aunt , who were dining somewhere down below an infinite depth of stairs ; for unless she were up in the sky ( the child thought ) , they must be deep down in the bowels of the earth .
At home -- before she came to live in Harley Street -- her mother 's dressing-room had been her nursery ; and , as they kept early hours in the country parsonage , Margaret had always had her meals with her father and mother .
Oh !
well did the tall stately girl of eighteen remember the tears shed with such wild passion of grief by the little girl of nine , as she hid her face under the bed-clothes , in that first night ; and how she was bidden not to cry by the nurse , because it would disturb Miss Edith ; and how she had cried as bitterly , but more quietly , till her newly-seen , grand , pretty aunt had come softly upstairs with Mr. Hale to show him his little sleeping daughter .
Then the little Margaret had hushed her sobs , and tried to lie quiet as if asleep , for fear of making her father unhappy by her grief , which she dared not express before her aunt , and which she rather thought it was wrong to feel at all after the long hoping , and planning , and contriving they had gone through at home , before her wardrobe could be arranged so as to suit her grander circumstances , and before papa could leave his parish to come up to London , even for a few days .
Now she had got to love the old nursery , though it was but a dismantled place ; and she looked all round , with a kind of cat-like regret , at the idea of leaving it for ever in three days .
' Ah Newton ! '
said she , ' I think we shall all be sorry to leave this dear old room . '
— I — [ 1 ] Stately , plump Buck Mulligan came from the stairhead , bearing a bowl of lather on which a mirror and a razor lay crossed .
A yellow dressinggown , ungirdled , was sustained gently behind him on the mild morning air .
He held the bowl aloft and intoned : — Introibo ad altare Dei .
Halted , he peered down the dark winding stairs and called out coarsely : — Come up , Kinch !
Come up , you fearful jesuit !
Solemnly he came forward and mounted the round gunrest .
He faced about and blessed gravely thrice the tower , the surrounding land and the awaking mountains .
Then , catching sight of Stephen Dedalus , he bent towards him and made rapid crosses in the air , gurgling in his throat and shaking his head .
Stephen Dedalus , displeased and sleepy , leaned his arms on the top of the staircase and looked coldly at the shaking gurgling face that blessed him , equine in its length , and at the light untonsured hair , grained and hued like pale oak .
Buck Mulligan peeped an instant under the mirror and then covered the bowl smartly .
— Back to barracks !
he said sternly .
He added in a preacher ’s tone : — For this , O dearly beloved , is the genuine Christine : body and soul and blood and ouns .
Slow music , please .
Shut your eyes , gents .
One moment .
A little trouble about those white corpuscles .
Silence , all .
He peered sideways up and gave a long slow whistle of call , then paused awhile in rapt attention , his even white teeth glistening here and there with gold points .
Chrysostomos .
Two strong shrill whistles answered through the calm .
— Thanks , old chap , he cried briskly .
That will do nicely .
Switch off the current , will you ?
He skipped off the gunrest and looked gravely at his watcher , gathering about his legs the loose folds of his gown .
The plump shadowed face and sullen oval jowl recalled a prelate , patron of arts in the middle ages .
A pleasant smile broke quietly over his lips .
— The mockery of it !
he said gaily .
Your absurd name , an ancient Greek !
He pointed his finger in friendly jest and went over to the parapet , laughing to himself .
Stephen Dedalus stepped up , followed him wearily halfway and sat down on the edge of the gunrest , watching him still as he propped his mirror on the parapet , dipped the brush in the bowl and lathered cheeks and neck .
Buck Mulligan ’s gay voice went on .
— My name is absurd too : Malachi Mulligan , two dactyls .
But it has a Hellenic ring , has n’t it ?
Tripping and sunny like the buck himself .
We must go to Athens .
Will you come if I can get the aunt to fork out twenty quid ?
He laid the brush aside and , laughing with delight , cried : — Will he come ?
The jejune jesuit !
Ceasing , he began to shave with care .
— Tell me , Mulligan , Stephen said quietly .
— Yes , my love ?
— How long is Haines going to stay in this tower ?
Buck Mulligan showed a shaven cheek over his right shoulder .
— God , is n’t he dreadful ?
he said frankly .
A ponderous Saxon .
He thinks you ’re not a gentleman .
God , these bloody English !
Bursting with money and indigestion .
Because he comes from Oxford .
You know , Dedalus , you have the real Oxford manner .
He ca n’t make you out .
O , my name for you is the best : Kinch , the knife-blade .
He shaved warily over his chin .
— He was raving all night about a black panther , Stephen said .
Where is his guncase ?
— A woful lunatic !
Mulligan said .
Were you in a funk ?
— I was , Stephen said with energy and growing fear .
Out here in the dark with a man I do n’t know raving and moaning to himself about shooting a black panther .
You saved men from drowning .
I ’m not a hero , however .
If he stays on here I am off .
Buck Mulligan frowned at the lather on his razorblade .
He hopped down from his perch and began to search his trouser pockets hastily .
— Scutter !
he cried thickly .
He came over to the gunrest and , thrusting a hand into Stephen ’s upper pocket , said : — Lend us a loan of your noserag to wipe my razor .
Stephen suffered him to pull out and hold up on show by its corner a dirty crumpled handkerchief .
Buck Mulligan wiped the razorblade neatly .
Then , gazing over the handkerchief , he said : — The bard ’s noserag !
A new art colour for our Irish poets : snotgreen .
You can almost taste it , ca n’t you ?
He mounted to the parapet again and gazed out over Dublin bay , his fair oakpale hair stirring slightly .
— God !
he said quietly .
Is n’t the sea what Algy calls it : a great sweet mother ?
The snotgreen sea .
The scrotumtightening sea .
Epi oinopa ponton .
Ah , Dedalus , the Greeks !
I must teach you .
You must read them in the original .
Thalatta !
Thalatta !
She is our great sweet mother .
Come and look .
Stephen stood up and went over to the parapet .
Leaning on it he looked down on the water and on the mailboat clearing the harbourmouth of Kingstown .
— Our mighty mother !
Buck Mulligan said .
He turned abruptly his grey searching eyes from the sea to Stephen ’s face .
— The aunt thinks you killed your mother , he said .
That ’s why she wo n’t let me have anything to do with you .
— Someone killed her , Stephen said gloomily .
— You could have knelt down , damn it , Kinch , when your dying mother asked you , Buck Mulligan said .
I ’m hyperborean as much as you .
But to think of your mother begging you with her last breath to kneel down and pray for her .
And you refused .
There is something sinister in you ... .
He broke off and lathered again lightly his farther cheek .
A tolerant smile curled his lips .
— But a lovely mummer !
he murmured to himself .
Kinch , the loveliest mummer of them all !
He shaved evenly and with care , in silence , seriously .
Stephen , an elbow rested on the jagged granite , leaned his palm against his brow and gazed at the fraying edge of his shiny black coat-sleeve .
Pain , that was not yet the pain of love , fretted his heart .
Silently , in a dream she had come to him after her death , her wasted body within its loose brown graveclothes giving off an odour of wax and rosewood , her breath , that had bent upon him , mute , reproachful , a faint odour of wetted ashes .
Across the threadbare cuffedge he saw the sea hailed as a great sweet mother by the wellfed voice beside him .
The ring of bay and skyline held a dull green mass of liquid .
A bowl of white china had stood beside her deathbed holding the green sluggish bile which she had torn up from her rotting liver by fits of loud groaning vomiting .
Buck Mulligan wiped again his razorblade .
— Ah , poor dogsbody !
he said in a kind voice .
I must give you a shirt and a few noserags .
How are the secondhand breeks ?
— They fit well enough , Stephen answered .
Buck Mulligan attacked the hollow beneath his underlip .
— The mockery of it , he said contentedly .
Secondleg they should be .
God knows what poxy bowsy left them off .
I have a lovely pair with a hair stripe , grey .
You ’ll look spiffing in them .
I ’m not joking , Kinch .
You look damn well when you ’re dressed .
— Thanks , Stephen said .
I ca n’t wear them if they are grey .
— He ca n’t wear them , Buck Mulligan told his face in the mirror .
Etiquette is etiquette .
He kills his mother but he ca n’t wear grey trousers .
He folded his razor neatly and with stroking palps of fingers felt the smooth skin .
Stephen turned his gaze from the sea and to the plump face with its smokeblue mobile eyes .
— That fellow I was with in the Ship last night , said Buck Mulligan , says you have g. p. i. He ’s up in Dottyville with Connolly Norman .
General paralysis of the insane !
He swept the mirror a half circle in the air to flash the tidings abroad in sunlight now radiant on the sea .
His curling shaven lips laughed and the edges of his white glittering teeth .
Laughter seized all his strong wellknit trunk .
— Look at yourself , he said , you dreadful bard !
Stephen bent forward and peered at the mirror held out to him , cleft by a crooked crack .
Hair on end .
As he and others see me .
Who chose this face for me ?
This dogsbody to rid of vermin .
It asks me too .
— I pinched it out of the skivvy ’s room , Buck Mulligan said .
It does her all right .
The aunt always keeps plainlooking servants for Malachi .
Lead him not into temptation .
And her name is Ursula .
Laughing again , he brought the mirror away from Stephen ’s peering eyes .
— The rage of Caliban at not seeing his face in a mirror , he said .
If Wilde were only alive to see you !
Drawing back and pointing , Stephen said with bitterness : — It is a symbol of Irish art .
The cracked lookingglass of a servant .
Buck Mulligan suddenly linked his arm in Stephen ’s and walked with him round the tower , his razor and mirror clacking in the pocket where he had thrust them .
— It ’s not fair to tease you like that , Kinch , is it ?
he said kindly .
God knows you have more spirit than any of them .
Parried again .
He fears the lancet of my art as I fear that of his .
The cold steel pen .
— Cracked lookingglass of a servant !
Tell that to the oxy chap downstairs and touch him for a guinea .
He ’s stinking with money and thinks you ’re not a gentleman .
His old fellow made his tin by selling jalap to Zulus or some bloody swindle or other .
God , Kinch , if you and I could only work together we might do something for the island .
Hellenise it .
Cranly ’s arm .
His arm .
— And to think of your having to beg from these swine .
I ’m the only one that knows what you are .
Why do n’t you trust me more ?
What have you up your nose against me ?
Is it Haines ?
If he makes any noise here I ’ll bring down Seymour and we ’ll give him a ragging worse than they gave Clive Kempthorpe .
Book First I Strether 's first question , when he reached the hotel , was about his friend ; yet on his learning that Waymarsh was apparently not to arrive till evening he was not wholly disconcerted .
A telegram from him bespeaking a room " only if not noisy , " reply paid , was produced for the enquirer at the office , so that the understanding they should meet at Chester rather than at Liverpool remained to that extent sound .
The same secret principle , however , that had prompted Strether not absolutely to desire Waymarsh 's presence at the dock , that had led him thus to postpone for a few hours his enjoyment of it , now operated to make him feel he could still wait without disappointment .
They would dine together at the worst , and , with all respect to dear old Waymarsh -- if not even , for that matter , to himself -- there was little fear that in the sequel they should n't see enough of each other .
The principle I have just mentioned as operating had been , with the most newly disembarked of the two men , wholly instinctive -- the fruit of a sharp sense that , delightful as it would be to find himself looking , after so much separation , into his comrade 's face , his business would be a trifle bungled should he simply arrange for this countenance to present itself to the nearing steamer as the first " note , " of Europe .
Mixed with everything was the apprehension , already , on Strether 's part , that it would , at best , throughout , prove the note of Europe in quite a sufficient degree .
That note had been meanwhile -- since the previous afternoon , thanks to this happier device -- such a consciousness of personal freedom as he had n't known for years ; such a deep taste of change and of having above all for the moment nobody and nothing to consider , as promised already , if headlong hope were not too foolish , to colour his adventure with cool success .
There were people on the ship with whom he had easily consorted -- so far as ease could up to now be imputed to him -- and who for the most part plunged straight into the current that set from the landing-stage to London ; there were others who had invited him to a tryst at the inn and had even invoked his aid for a " look round " at the beauties of Liverpool ; but he had stolen away from every one alike , had kept no appointment and renewed no acquaintance , had been indifferently aware of the number of persons who esteemed themselves fortunate in being , unlike himself , " met , " and had even independently , unsociably , alone , without encounter or relapse and by mere quiet evasion , given his afternoon and evening to the immediate and the sensible .
They formed a qualified draught of Europe , an afternoon and an evening on the banks of the Mersey , but such as it was he took his potion at least undiluted .
He winced a little , truly , at the thought that Waymarsh might be already at Chester ; he reflected that , should he have to describe himself there as having " got in " so early , it would be difficult to make the interval look particularly eager ; but he was like a man who , elatedly finding in his pocket more money than usual , handles it a while and idly and pleasantly chinks it before addressing himself to the business of spending .
That he was prepared to be vague to Waymarsh about the hour of the ship 's touching , and that he both wanted extremely to see him and enjoyed extremely the duration of delay -- these things , it is to be conceived , were early signs in him that his relation to his actual errand might prove none of the simplest .
He was burdened , poor Strether -- it had better be confessed at the outset -- with the oddity of a double consciousness .
There was detachment in his zeal and curiosity in his indifference .
After the young woman in the glass cage had held up to him across her counter the pale-pink leaflet bearing his friend 's name , which she neatly pronounced , he turned away to find himself , in the hall , facing a lady who met his eyes as with an intention suddenly determined , and whose features -- not freshly young , not markedly fine , but on happy terms with each other -- came back to him as from a recent vision .
For a moment they stood confronted ; then the moment placed her : he had noticed her the day before , noticed her at his previous inn , where -- again in the hall -- she had been briefly engaged with some people of his own ship 's company .
Nothing had actually passed between them , and he would as little have been able to say what had been the sign of her face for him on the first occasion as to name the ground of his present recognition .
Recognition at any rate appeared to prevail on her own side as well -- which would only have added to the mystery .
All she now began by saying to him nevertheless was that , having chanced to catch his enquiry , she was moved to ask , by his leave , if it were possibly a question of Mr. Waymarsh of Milrose Connecticut -- Mr. Waymarsh the American lawyer .
" Oh yes , " he replied , " my very well-known friend .
He 's to meet me here , coming up from Malvern , and I supposed he 'd already have arrived .
But he does n't come till later , and I 'm relieved not to have kept him .
Do you know him ? "
Strether wound up .
It was n't till after he had spoken that he became aware of how much there had been in him of response ; when the tone of her own rejoinder , as well as the play of something more in her face -- something more , that is , than its apparently usual restless light -- seemed to notify him .
" I 've met him at Milrose -- where I used sometimes , a good while ago , to stay ; I had friends there who were friends of his , and I 've been at his house .
I wo n't answer for it that he would know me , " Strether 's new acquaintance pursued ; " but I should be delighted to see him .
Perhaps , " she added , " I shall -- for I 'm staying over . "
She paused while our friend took in these things , and it was as if a good deal of talk had already passed .
They even vaguely smiled at it , and Strether presently observed that Mr. Waymarsh would , no doubt , be easily to be seen .
This , however , appeared to affect the lady as if she might have advanced too far .
She appeared to have no reserves about anything .
" Oh , " she said , " he wo n't care ! "
-- and she immediately thereupon remarked that she believed Strether knew the Munsters ; the Munsters being the people he had seen her with at Liverpool .
But he did n't , it happened , know the Munsters well enough to give the case much of a lift ; so that they were left together as if over the mere laid table of conversation .
Her qualification of the mentioned connexion had rather removed than placed a dish , and there seemed nothing else to serve .
Their attitude remained , none the less , that of not forsaking the board ; and the effect of this in turn was to give them the appearance of having accepted each other with an absence of preliminaries practically complete .
They moved along the hall together , and Strether 's companion threw off that the hotel had the advantage of a garden .
He was aware by this time of his strange inconsequence : he had shirked the intimacies of the steamer and had muffled the shock of Waymarsh only to find himself forsaken , in this sudden case , both of avoidance and of caution .
He passed , under this unsought protection and before he had so much as gone up to his room , into the garden of the hotel , and at the end of ten minutes had agreed to meet there again , as soon as he should have made himself tidy , the dispenser of such good assurances .
He wanted to look at the town , and they would forthwith look together .
It was almost as if she had been in possession and received him as a guest .
Her acquaintance with the place presented her in a manner as a hostess , and Strether had a rueful glance for the lady in the glass cage .
It was as if this personage had seen herself instantly superseded .
When in a quarter of an hour he came down , what his hostess saw , what she might have taken in with a vision kindly adjusted , was the lean , the slightly loose figure of a man of the middle height and something more perhaps than the middle age -- a man of five-and-fifty , whose most immediate signs were a marked bloodless brownness of face , a thick dark moustache , of characteristically American cut , growing strong and falling low , a head of hair still abundant but irregularly streaked with grey , and a nose of bold free prominence , the even line , the high finish , as it might have been called , of which , had a certain effect of mitigation .
A perpetual pair of glasses astride of this fine ridge , and a line , unusually deep and drawn , the prolonged pen-stroke of time , accompanying the curve of the moustache from nostril to chin , did something to complete the facial furniture that an attentive observer would have seen catalogued , on the spot , in the vision of the other party to Strether 's appointment .
She waited for him in the garden , the other party , drawing on a pair of singularly fresh soft and elastic light gloves and presenting herself with a superficial readiness which , as he approached her over the small smooth lawn and in the watery English sunshine , he might , with his rougher preparation , have marked as the model for such an occasion .
She had , this lady , a perfect plain propriety , an expensive subdued suitability , that her companion was not free to analyse , but that struck him , so that his consciousness of it was instantly acute , as a quality quite new to him .
Before reaching her he stopped on the grass and went through the form of feeling for something , possibly forgotten , in the light overcoat he carried on his arm ; yet the essence of the act was no more than the impulse to gain time .
Nothing could have been odder than Strether 's sense of himself as at that moment launched in something of which the sense would be quite disconnected from the sense of his past and which was literally beginning there and then .
It had begun in fact already upstairs and before the dressing glass that struck him as blocking further , so strangely , the dimness of the window of his dull bedroom ; begun with a sharper survey of the elements of Appearance than he had for a long time been moved to make .
He had during those moments felt these elements to be not so much to his hand as he should have liked , and then had fallen back on the thought that they were precisely a matter as to which help was supposed to come from what he was about to do .
He was about to go up to London , so that hat and necktie might wait .
What had come as straight to him as a ball in a well-played game -- and caught moreover not less neatly -- was just the air , in the person of his friend , of having seen and chosen , the air of achieved possession of those vague qualities and quantities that collectively figured to him as the advantage snatched from lucky chances .
Without pomp or circumstance , certainly , as her original address to him , equally with his own response , had been , he would have sketched to himself his impression of her as : " Well , she 's more thoroughly civilized -- ! "
If " More thoroughly than WHOM ? "
would not have been for him a sequel to this remark , that was just by reason of his deep consciousness of the bearing of his comparison .
CHAPTER I I TAKE A COUNTRY HOUSE This is the story of how a middle-aged spinster lost her mind , deserted her domestic gods in the city , took a furnished house for the summer out of town , and found herself involved in one of those mysterious crimes that keep our newspapers and detective agencies happy and prosperous .
For twenty years I had been perfectly comfortable ; for twenty years I had had the window-boxes filled in the spring , the carpets lifted , the awnings put up and the furniture covered with brown linen ; for as many summers I had said good-by to my friends , and , after watching their perspiring hegira , had settled down to a delicious quiet in town , where the mail comes three times a day , and the water supply does not depend on a tank on the roof .
And then -- the madness seized me .
When I look back over the months I spent at Sunnyside , I wonder that I survived at all .
As it is , I show the wear and tear of my harrowing experiences .
I have turned very gray -- Liddy reminded me of it , only yesterday , by saying that a little bluing in the rinse-water would make my hair silvery , instead of a yellowish white .
I hate to be reminded of unpleasant things and I snapped her off .
" No , " I said sharply , " I 'm not going to use bluing at my time of life , or starch , either . "
Liddy 's nerves are gone , she says , since that awful summer , but she has enough left , goodness knows !
And when she begins to go around with a lump in her throat , all I have to do is to threaten to return to Sunnyside , and she is frightened into a semblance of cheerfulness , -- from which you may judge that the summer there was anything but a success .
The newspaper accounts have been so garbled and incomplete -- one of them mentioned me but once , and then only as the tenant at the time the thing happened -- that I feel it my due to tell what I know .
Mr. Jamieson , the detective , said himself he could never have done without me , although he gave me little enough credit , in print .
I shall have to go back several years -- thirteen , to be exact -- to start my story .
At that time my brother died , leaving me his two children .
Halsey was eleven then , and Gertrude was seven .
All the responsibilities of maternity were thrust upon me suddenly ; to perfect the profession of motherhood requires precisely as many years as the child has lived , like the man who started to carry the calf and ended by walking along with the bull on his shoulders .
However , I did the best I could .
When Gertrude got past the hair-ribbon age , and Halsey asked for a scarf-pin and put on long trousers -- and a wonderful help that was to the darning .
-- I sent them away to good schools .
After that , my responsibility was chiefly postal , with three months every summer in which to replenish their wardrobes , look over their lists of acquaintances , and generally to take my foster-motherhood out of its nine months ' retirement in camphor .
I missed the summers with them when , somewhat later , at boarding-school and college , the children spent much of their vacations with friends .
Gradually I found that my name signed to a check was even more welcome than when signed to a letter , though I wrote them at stated intervals .
But when Halsey had finished his electrical course and Gertrude her boarding-school , and both came home to stay , things were suddenly changed .
The winter Gertrude came out was nothing but a succession of sitting up late at night to bring her home from things , taking her to the dressmakers between naps the next day , and discouraging ineligible youths with either more money than brains , or more brains than money .
Also , I acquired a great many things : to say lingerie for under-garments , " frocks " and " gowns " instead of dresses , and that beardless sophomores are not college boys , but college men .
Halsey required less personal supervision , and as they both got their mother 's fortune that winter , my responsibility became purely moral .
Halsey bought a car , of course , and I learned how to tie over my bonnet a gray baize veil , and , after a time , never to stop to look at the dogs one has run down .
People are apt to be so unpleasant about their dogs .
The additions to my education made me a properly equipped maiden aunt , and by spring I was quite tractable .
So when Halsey suggested camping in the Adirondacks and Gertrude wanted Bar Harbor , we compromised on a good country house with links near , within motor distance of town and telephone distance of the doctor .
That was how we went to Sunnyside .
We went out to inspect the property , and it seemed to deserve its name .
Its cheerful appearance gave no indication whatever of anything out of the ordinary .
Only one thing seemed unusual to me : the housekeeper , who had been left in charge , had moved from the house to the gardener 's lodge , a few days before .
As the lodge was far enough away from the house , it seemed to me that either fire or thieves could complete their work of destruction undisturbed .
The property was an extensive one : the house on the top of a hill , which sloped away in great stretches of green lawn and clipped hedges , to the road ; and across the valley , perhaps a couple of miles away , was the Greenwood Club House .
Gertrude and Halsey were infatuated .
" Why , it 's everything you want , " Halsey said " View , air , good water and good roads .
As for the house , it 's big enough for a hospital , if it has a Queen Anne front and a Mary Anne back , " which was ridiculous : it was pure Elizabethan .
Of course we took the place ; it was not my idea of comfort , being much too large and sufficiently isolated to make the servant question serious .
But I give myself credit for this : whatever has happened since , I never blamed Halsey and Gertrude for taking me there .
And another thing : if the series of catastrophes there did nothing else , it taught me one thing -- that somehow , somewhere , from perhaps a half-civilized ancestor who wore a sheepskin garment and trailed his food or his prey , I have in me the instinct of the chase .
Were I a man I should be a trapper of criminals , trailing them as relentlessly as no doubt my sheepskin ancestor did his wild boar .
But being an unmarried woman , with the handicap of my sex , my first acquaintance with crime will probably be my last .
Indeed , it came near enough to being my last acquaintance with anything .
The property was owned by Paul Armstrong , the president of the Traders ' Bank , who at the time we took the house was in the west with his wife and daughter , and a Doctor Walker , the Armstrong family physician .
Halsey knew Louise Armstrong , -- had been rather attentive to her the winter before , but as Halsey was always attentive to somebody , I had not thought of it seriously , although she was a charming girl .
I knew of Mr. Armstrong only through his connection with the bank , where the children 's money was largely invested , and through an ugly story about the son , Arnold Armstrong , who was reported to have forged his father 's name , for a considerable amount , to some bank paper .
However , the story had had no interest for me .
I cleared Halsey and Gertrude away to a house party , and moved out to Sunnyside the first of May .
The roads were bad , but the trees were in leaf , and there were still tulips in the borders around the house .
The arbutus was fragrant in the woods under the dead leaves , and on the way from the station , a short mile , while the car stuck in the mud , I found a bank showered with tiny forget-me-nots .
The birds -- do n't ask me what kind ; they all look alike to me , unless they have a hall mark of some bright color -- the birds were chirping in the hedges , and everything breathed of peace .
Liddy , who was born and bred on a brick pavement , got a little bit down-spirited when the crickets began to chirp , or scrape their legs together , or whatever it is they do , at twilight .
The first night passed quietly enough .
I have always been grateful for that one night 's peace ; it shows what the country might be , under favorable circumstances .
Never after that night did I put my head on my pillow with any assurance how long it would be there ; or on my shoulders , for that matter .
On the following morning Liddy and Mrs. Ralston , my own housekeeper , had a difference of opinion , and Mrs. Ralston left on the eleven train .
Just after luncheon , Burke , the butler , was taken unexpectedly with a pain in his right side , much worse when I was within hearing distance , and by afternoon he was started cityward .
That night the cook 's sister had a baby -- the cook , seeing indecision in my face , made it twins on second thought -- and , to be short , by noon the next day the household staff was down to Liddy and myself .
And this in a house with twenty-two rooms and five baths !
Liddy wanted to go back to the city at once , but the milk-boy said that Thomas Johnson , the Armstrongs ' colored butler , was working as a waiter at the Greenwood Club , and might come back .
I have the usual scruples about coercing people 's servants away , but few of us have any conscience regarding institutions or corporations -- witness the way we beat railroads and street-car companies when we can -- so I called up the club , and about eight o'clock Thomas Johnson came to see me .
Poor Thomas !
Well , it ended by my engaging Thomas on the spot , at outrageous wages , and with permission to sleep in the gardener 's lodge , empty since the house was rented .
The old man -- he was white-haired and a little stooped , but with an immense idea of his personal dignity -- gave me his reasons hesitatingly .
" I ai n't sayin ' nothin ' , Mis ' Innes , " he said , with his hand on the door-knob , " but there 's been goin 's - on here this las ' few months as ai n't natchal .
' Tai n't one thing an ' ' tai n't another -- it 's jest a door squealin ' here , an ' a winder closin ' there , but when doors an ' winders gets to cuttin ' up capers and there 's nobody nigh 'em , it 's time Thomas Johnson sleeps somewhar 's else . "
PART I. FRIENDS OF CHILDHOOD I Dr. Howard Archie had just come up from a game of pool with the Jewish clothier and two traveling men who happened to be staying overnight in Moonstone .
His offices were in the Duke Block , over the drug store .
Larry , the doctor 's man , had lit the overhead light in the waiting-room and the double student 's lamp on the desk in the study .
The isinglass sides of the hard-coal burner were aglow , and the air in the study was so hot that as he came in the doctor opened the door into his little operating-room , where there was no stove .
The waiting room was carpeted and stiffly furnished , something like a country parlor .
The study had worn , unpainted floors , but there was a look of winter comfort about it .
The doctor 's flat-top desk was large and well made ; the papers were in orderly piles , under glass weights .
Behind the stove a wide bookcase , with double glass doors , reached from the floor to the ceiling .
It was filled with medical books of every thickness and color .
On the top shelf stood a long row of thirty or forty volumes , bound all alike in dark mottled board covers , with imitation leather backs .
As the doctor in New England villages is proverbially old , so the doctor in small Colorado towns twenty-five years ago was generally young .
Dr. Archie was barely thirty .
He was tall , with massive shoulders which he held stiffly , and a large , well-shaped head .
He was a distinguished-looking man , for that part of the world , at least .
There was something individual in the way in which his reddish-brown hair , parted cleanly at the side , bushed over his high forehead .
His nose was straight and thick , and his eyes were intelligent .
He wore a curly , reddish mustache and an imperial , cut trimly , which made him look a little like the pictures of Napoleon III .
His hands were large and well kept , but ruggedly formed , and the backs were shaded with crinkly reddish hair .
He wore a blue suit of woolly , wide-waled serge ; the traveling men had known at a glance that it was made by a Denver tailor .
The doctor was always well dressed .
Dr. Archie turned up the student 's lamp and sat down in the swivel chair before his desk .
He sat uneasily , beating a tattoo on his knees with his fingers , and looked about him as if he were bored .
He glanced at his watch , then absently took from his pocket a bunch of small keys , selected one and looked at it .
A contemptuous smile , barely perceptible , played on his lips , but his eyes remained meditative .
Behind the door that led into the hall , under his buffalo-skin driving-coat , was a locked cupboard .
This the doctor opened mechanically , kicking aside a pile of muddy overshoes .
Inside , on the shelves , were whiskey glasses and decanters , lemons , sugar , and bitters .
Hearing a step in the empty , echoing hall without , the doctor closed the cupboard again , snapping the Yale lock .
The door of the waiting-room opened , a man entered and came on into the consulting-room .
“ Good-evening , Mr. Kronborg , ” said the doctor carelessly .
“ Sit down . ”
His visitor was a tall , loosely built man , with a thin brown beard , streaked with gray .
He wore a frock coat , a broad-brimmed black hat , a white lawn necktie , and steel rimmed spectacles .
Altogether there was a pretentious and important air about him , as he lifted the skirts of his coat and sat down .
“ Good-evening , doctor .
Can you step around to the house with me ?
I think Mrs. Kronborg will need you this evening . ”
This was said with profound gravity and , curiously enough , with a slight embarrassment .
“ Any hurry ? ” the doctor asked over his shoulder as he went into his operating-room .
Mr. Kronborg coughed behind his hand , and contracted his brows .
His face threatened at every moment to break into a smile of foolish excitement .
He controlled it only by calling upon his habitual pulpit manner .
“ Well , I think it would be as well to go immediately .
Mrs. Kronborg will be more comfortable if you are there .
She has been suffering for some time . ”
The doctor came back and threw a black bag upon his desk .
He wrote some instructions for his man on a prescription pad and then drew on his overcoat .
“ All ready , ” he announced , putting out his lamp .
Mr. Kronborg rose and they tramped through the empty hall and down the stairway to the street .
The drug store below was dark , and the saloon next door was just closing .
Every other light on Main Street was out .
On either side of the road and at the outer edge of the board sidewalk , the snow had been shoveled into breastworks .
The town looked small and black , flattened down in the snow , muffled and all but extinguished .
Overhead the stars shone gloriously .
It was impossible not to notice them .
The air was so clear that the white sand hills to the east of Moonstone gleamed softly .
Following the Reverend Mr. Kronborg along the narrow walk , past the little dark , sleeping houses , the doctor looked up at the flashing night and whistled softly .
It did seem that people were stupider than they need be ; as if on a night like this there ought to be something better to do than to sleep nine hours , or to assist Mrs. Kronborg in functions which she could have performed so admirably unaided .
He wished he had gone down to Denver to hear Fay Templeton sing “ See-Saw . ”
Then he remembered that he had a personal interest in this family , after all .
They turned into another street and saw before them lighted windows ; a low story-and-a-half house , with a wing built on at the right and a kitchen addition at the back , everything a little on the slant -- roofs , windows , and doors .
As they approached the gate , Peter Kronborg 's pace grew brisker .
His nervous , ministerial cough annoyed the doctor .
“ Exactly as if he were going to give out a text , ” he thought .
He drew off his glove and felt in his vest pocket .
“ Have a troche , Kronborg , ” he said , producing some .
“ Sent me for samples .
Very good for a rough throat . ”
“ Ah , thank you , thank you .
I was in something of a hurry .
I neglected to put on my overshoes .
Here we are , doctor . ”
Kronborg opened his front door -- seemed delighted to be at home again .
The front hall was dark and cold ; the hatrack was hung with an astonishing number of children 's hats and caps and cloaks .
They were even piled on the table beneath the hatrack .
Under the table was a heap of rubbers and overshoes .
While the doctor hung up his coat and hat , Peter Kronborg opened the door into the living-room .
A glare of light greeted them , and a rush of hot , stale air , smelling of warming flannels .
At three o'clock in the morning Dr. Archie was in the parlor putting on his cuffs and coat -- there was no spare bedroom in that house .
Peter Kronborg 's seventh child , a boy , was being soothed and cosseted by his aunt , Mrs. Kronborg was asleep , and the doctor was going home .
But he wanted first to speak to Kronborg , who , coatless and fluttery , was pouring coal into the kitchen stove .
As the doctor crossed the dining-room he paused and listened .
From one of the wing rooms , off to the left , he heard rapid , distressed breathing .
He went to the kitchen door .
“ One of the children sick in there ? ” he asked , nodding toward the partition .
Kronborg hung up the stove-lifter and dusted his fingers .
“ It must be Thea .
I meant to ask you to look at her .
She has a croupy cold .
But in my excitement -- Mrs. Kronborg is doing finely , eh , doctor ?
Not many of your patients with such a constitution , I expect . ”
“ Oh , yes .
She 's a fine mother . ”
The doctor took up the lamp from the kitchen table and unceremoniously went into the wing room .
Two chubby little boys were asleep in a double bed , with the coverlids over their noses and their feet drawn up .
In a single bed , next to theirs , lay a little girl of eleven , wide awake , two yellow braids sticking up on the pillow behind her .
Her face was scarlet and her eyes were blazing .
The doctor shut the door behind him .
“ Feel pretty sick , Thea ? ” he asked as he took out his thermometer .
“ Why did n't you call somebody ? ”
She looked at him with greedy affection .
“ I thought you were here , ” she spoke between quick breaths .
“ There is a new baby , is n't there ?
Which ? ”
“ Which ? ” repeated the doctor .
“ Brother or sister ? ”
He smiled and sat down on the edge of the bed .
“ Brother , ” he said , taking her hand .
“ Open . ”
“ Good .
Brothers are better , ” she murmured as he put the glass tube under her tongue .
“ Now , be still , I want to count . ”
Dr. Archie reached for her hand and took out his watch .
When he put her hand back under the quilt he went over to one of the windows -- they were both tight shut -- and lifted it a little way .
He reached up and ran his hand along the cold , unpapered wall .
“ Keep under the covers ; I 'll come back to you in a moment , ” he said , bending over the glass lamp with his thermometer .
He winked at her from the door before he shut it .
Peter Kronborg was sitting in his wife 's room , holding the bundle which contained his son .
His air of cheerful importance , his beard and glasses , even his shirt-sleeves , annoyed the doctor .
He beckoned Kronborg into the living-room and said sternly : -- “ You 've got a very sick child in there .
Why did n't you call me before ?
It 's pneumonia , and she must have been sick for several days .
Put the baby down somewhere , please , and help me make up the bed-lounge here in the parlor .
She 's got to be in a warm room , and she 's got to be quiet .
You must keep the other children out .
Here , this thing opens up , I see , ” swinging back the top of the carpet lounge .
“ We can lift her mattress and carry her in just as she is .
I do n't want to disturb her more than is necessary . ”
CHAPTER I. Mrs. Rachel Lynde is Surprised | MRS. Rachel Lynde lived just where the Avonlea main road dipped down into a little hollow , fringed with alders and ladies ’ eardrops and traversed by a brook that had its source away back in the woods of the old Cuthbert place ; it was reputed to be an intricate , headlong brook in its earlier course through those woods , with dark secrets of pool and cascade ; but by the time it reached Lynde ’s Hollow it was a quiet , well-conducted little stream , for not even a brook could run past Mrs. Rachel Lynde ’s door without due regard for decency and decorum ; it probably was conscious that Mrs. Rachel was sitting at her window , keeping a sharp eye on everything that passed , from brooks and children up , and that if she noticed anything odd or out of place she would never rest until she had ferreted out the whys and wherefores thereof .
There are plenty of people in Avonlea and out of it , who can attend closely to their neighbor ’s business by dint of neglecting their own ; but Mrs. Rachel Lynde was one of those capable creatures who can manage their own concerns and those of other folks into the bargain .
She was a notable housewife ; her work was always done and well done ; she “ ran ” the Sewing Circle , helped run the Sunday-school , and was the strongest prop of the Church Aid Society and Foreign Missions Auxiliary .
Yet with all this Mrs. Rachel found abundant time to sit for hours at her kitchen window , knitting “ cotton warp ” quilts -- she had knitted sixteen of them , as Avonlea housekeepers were wont to tell in awed voices -- and keeping a sharp eye on the main road that crossed the hollow and wound up the steep red hill beyond .
Since Avonlea occupied a little triangular peninsula jutting out into the Gulf of St. Lawrence with water on two sides of it , anybody who went out of it or into it had to pass over that hill road and so run the unseen gauntlet of Mrs. Rachel ’s all-seeing eye .
She was sitting there one afternoon in early June .
The sun was coming in at the window warm and bright ; the orchard on the slope below the house was in a bridal flush of pinky-white bloom , hummed over by a myriad of bees .
Thomas Lynde -- a meek little man whom Avonlea people called “ Rachel Lynde ’s husband ” -- was sowing his late turnip seed on the hill field beyond the barn ; and Matthew Cuthbert ought to have been sowing his on the big red brook field away over by Green Gables .
Mrs. Rachel knew that he ought because she had heard him tell Peter Morrison the evening before in William J. Blair ’s store over at Carmody that he meant to sow his turnip seed the next afternoon .
Peter had asked him , of course , for Matthew Cuthbert had never been known to volunteer information about anything in his whole life .
And yet here was Matthew Cuthbert , at half-past three on the afternoon of a busy day , placidly driving over the hollow and up the hill ; moreover , he wore a white collar and his best suit of clothes , which was plain proof that he was going out of Avonlea ; and he had the buggy and the sorrel mare , which betokened that he was going a considerable distance .
Now , where was Matthew Cuthbert going and why was he going there ?
Had it been any other man in Avonlea , Mrs. Rachel , deftly putting this and that together , might have given a pretty good guess as to both questions .
But Matthew so rarely went from home that it must be something pressing and unusual which was taking him ; he was the shyest man alive and hated to have to go among strangers or to any place where he might have to talk .
Matthew , dressed up with a white collar and driving in a buggy , was something that did n’t happen often .
Mrs. Rachel , ponder as she might , could make nothing of it and her afternoon ’s enjoyment was spoiled .
“ I ’ll just step over to Green Gables after tea and find out from Marilla where he ’s gone and why , ” the worthy woman finally concluded .
“ He does n’t generally go to town this time of year and he _ never _ visits ; if he ’d run out of turnip seed he would n’t dress up and take the buggy to go for more ; he was n’t driving fast enough to be going for a doctor .
Yet something must have happened since last night to start him off .
I ’m clean puzzled , that ’s what , and I wo n’t know a minute ’s peace of mind or conscience until I know what has taken Matthew Cuthbert out of Avonlea today . ”
Accordingly after tea Mrs. Rachel set out ; she had not far to go ; the big , rambling , orchard-embowered house where the Cuthberts lived was a scant quarter of a mile up the road from Lynde ’s Hollow .
To be sure , the long lane made it a good deal further .
Matthew Cuthbert ’s father , as shy and silent as his son after him , had got as far away as he possibly could from his fellow men without actually retreating into the woods when he founded his homestead .
Green Gables was built at the furthest edge of his cleared land and there it was to this day , barely visible from the main road along which all the other Avonlea houses were so sociably situated .
Mrs. Rachel Lynde did not call living in such a place _ living _ at all .
“ It ’s just _ staying _ , that ’s what , ” she said as she stepped along the deep-rutted , grassy lane bordered with wild rose bushes .
“ It ’s no wonder Matthew and Marilla are both a little odd , living away back here by themselves .
Trees are n’t much company , though dear knows if they were there ’d be enough of them .
I ’d ruther look at people .
To be sure , they seem contented enough ; but then , I suppose , they ’re used to it .
A body can get used to anything , even to being hanged , as the Irishman said . ”
With this Mrs. Rachel stepped out of the lane into the backyard of Green Gables .
Very green and neat and precise was that yard , set about on one side with great patriarchal willows and the other with prim Lombardies .
Not a stray stick nor stone was to be seen , for Mrs. Rachel would have seen it if there had been .
Privately she was of the opinion that Marilla Cuthbert swept that yard over as often as she swept her house .
One could have eaten a meal off the ground without over-brimming the proverbial peck of dirt .
Mrs. Rachel rapped smartly at the kitchen door and stepped in when bidden to do so .
The kitchen at Green Gables was a cheerful apartment -- or would have been cheerful if it had not been so painfully clean as to give it something of the appearance of an unused parlor .
Its windows looked east and west ; through the west one , looking out on the back yard , came a flood of mellow June sunlight ; but the east one , whence you got a glimpse of the bloom white cherry-trees in the left orchard and nodding , slender birches down in the hollow by the brook , was greened over by a tangle of vines .
Here sat Marilla Cuthbert , when she sat at all , always slightly distrustful of sunshine , which seemed to her too dancing and irresponsible a thing for a world which was meant to be taken seriously ; and here she sat now , knitting , and the table behind her was laid for supper .
Mrs. Rachel , before she had fairly closed the door , had taken a mental note of everything that was on that table .
There were three plates laid , so that Marilla must be expecting some one home with Matthew to tea ; but the dishes were everyday dishes and there was only crab-apple preserves and one kind of cake , so that the expected company could not be any particular company .
Yet what of Matthew ’s white collar and the sorrel mare ?
Mrs. Rachel was getting fairly dizzy with this unusual mystery about quiet , unmysterious Green Gables .
“ Good evening , Rachel , ” Marilla said briskly .
“ This is a real fine evening , is n’t it ?
Wo n’t you sit down ?
How are all your folks ? ”
Something that for lack of any other name might be called friendship existed and always had existed between Marilla Cuthbert and Mrs. Rachel , in spite of -- or perhaps because of -- their dissimilarity .
Marilla was a tall , thin woman , with angles and without curves ; her dark hair showed some gray streaks and was always twisted up in a hard little knot behind with two wire hairpins stuck aggressively through it .
She looked like a woman of narrow experience and rigid conscience , which she was ; but there was a saving something about her mouth which , if it had been ever so slightly developed , might have been considered indicative of a sense of humor .
“ We ’re all pretty well , ” said Mrs. Rachel .
“ I was kind of afraid _ you _ were n’t , though , when I saw Matthew starting off today .
I thought maybe he was going to the doctor ’s . ”
Marilla ’s lips twitched understandingly .
She had expected Mrs. Rachel up ; she had known that the sight of Matthew jaunting off so unaccountably would be too much for her neighbor ’s curiosity .
“ Oh , no , I ’m quite well although I had a bad headache yesterday , ” she said .
“ Matthew went to Bright River .
We ’re getting a little boy from an orphan asylum in Nova Scotia and he ’s coming on the train tonight . ”
If Marilla had said that Matthew had gone to Bright River to meet a kangaroo from Australia Mrs. Rachel could not have been more astonished .
She was actually stricken dumb for five seconds .
It was unsupposable that Marilla was making fun of her , but Mrs. Rachel was almost forced to suppose it .
“ Are you in earnest , Marilla ? ” she demanded when voice returned to her .
“ Yes , of course , ” said Marilla , as if getting boys from orphan asylums in Nova Scotia were part of the usual spring work on any well-regulated Avonlea farm instead of being an unheard of innovation .
Mrs. Rachel felt that she had received a severe mental jolt .
She thought in exclamation points .
A boy !
Marilla and Matthew Cuthbert of all people adopting a boy !
From an orphan asylum !
Well , the world was certainly turning upside down !
She would be surprised at nothing after this !
Nothing !
I A STRANGER FROM SOUTH CAROLINA Time touches all things with destroying hand ; and if he seem now and then to bestow the bloom of youth , the sap of spring , it is but a brief mockery , to be surely and swiftly followed by the wrinkles of old age , the dry leaves and bare branches of winter .
And yet there are places where Time seems to linger lovingly long after youth has departed , and to which he seems loath to bring the evil day .
Who has not known some even-tempered old man or woman who seemed to have drunk of the fountain of youth ?
Who has not seen somewhere an old town that , having long since ceased to grow , yet held its own without perceptible decline ?
Some such trite reflection -- as apposite to the subject as most random reflections are -- passed through the mind of a young man who came out of the front door of the Patesville Hotel about nine o'clock one fine morning in spring , a few years after the Civil War , and started down Front Street toward the market-house .
Arriving at the town late the previous evening , he had been driven up from the steamboat in a carriage , from which he had been able to distinguish only the shadowy outlines of the houses along the street ; so that this morning walk was his first opportunity to see the town by daylight .
He was dressed in a suit of linen duck -- the day was warm -- a panama straw hat , and patent leather shoes .
In appearance he was tall , dark , with straight , black , lustrous hair , and very clean-cut , high-bred features .
When he paused by the clerk 's desk on his way out , to light his cigar , the day clerk , who had just come on duty , glanced at the register and read the last entry : -- " ' JOHN WARWICK , CLARENCE , SOUTH CAROLINA . '
" One of the South Ca ' lina bigbugs , I reckon -- probably in cotton , or turpentine . "
The gentleman from South Carolina , walking down the street , glanced about him with an eager look , in which curiosity and affection were mingled with a touch of bitterness .
He saw little that was not familiar , or that he had not seen in his dreams a hundred times during the past ten years .
There had been some changes , it is true , some melancholy changes , but scarcely anything by way of addition or improvement to counterbalance them .
Here and there blackened and dismantled walls marked the place where handsome buildings once had stood , for Sherman 's march to the sea had left its mark upon the town .
The stores were mostly of brick , two stories high , joining one another after the manner of cities .
Some of the names on the signs were familiar ; others , including a number of Jewish names , were quite unknown to him .
A two minutes ' walk brought Warwick -- the name he had registered under , and as we shall call him -- to the market-house , the central feature of Patesville , from both the commercial and the picturesque points of view .
Standing foursquare in the heart of the town , at the intersection of the two main streets , a " jog " at each street corner left around the market-house a little public square , which at this hour was well occupied by carts and wagons from the country and empty drays awaiting hire .
Warwick was unable to perceive much change in the market-house .
Perhaps the surface of the red brick , long unpainted , had scaled off a little more here and there .
There might have been a slight accretion of the moss and lichen on the shingled roof .
But the tall tower , with its four-faced clock , rose as majestically and uncompromisingly as though the land had never been subjugated .
Was it so irreconcilable , Warwick wondered , as still to peal out the curfew bell , which at nine o'clock at night had clamorously warned all negroes , slave or free , that it was unlawful for them to be abroad after that hour , under penalty of imprisonment or whipping ?
Was the old constable , whose chief business it had been to ring the bell , still alive and exercising the functions of his office , and had age lessened or increased the number of times that obliging citizens performed this duty for him during his temporary absences in the company of convivial spirits ?
A few moments later , Warwick saw a colored policeman in the old constable 's place -- a stronger reminder than even the burned buildings that war had left its mark upon the old town , with which Time had dealt so tenderly .
The lower story of the market-house was open on all four of its sides to the public square .
Warwick passed through one of the wide brick arches and traversed the building with a leisurely step .
He looked in vain into the stalls for the butcher who had sold fresh meat twice a week , on market days , and he felt a genuine thrill of pleasure when he recognized the red bandana turban of old Aunt Lyddy , the ancient negro woman who had sold him gingerbread and fried fish , and told him weird tales of witchcraft and conjuration , in the old days when , as an idle boy , he had loafed about the market-house .
He did not speak to her , however , or give her any sign of recognition .
He threw a glance toward a certain corner where steps led to the town hall above .
On this stairway he had once seen a manacled free negro shot while being taken upstairs for examination under a criminal charge .
Warwick recalled vividly how the shot had rung out .
He could see again the livid look of terror on the victim 's face , the gathering crowd , the resulting confusion .
The murderer , he recalled , had been tried and sentenced to imprisonment for life , but was pardoned by a merciful governor after serving a year of his sentence .
As Warwick was neither a prophet nor the son of a prophet , he could not foresee that , thirty years later , even this would seem an excessive punishment for so slight a misdemeanor .
Leaving the market-house , Warwick turned to the left , and kept on his course until he reached the next corner .
After another turn to the right , a dozen paces brought him in front of a small weather-beaten frame building , from which projected a wooden sign-board bearing the inscription : -- ARCHIBALD STRAIGHT , LAWYER .
He turned the knob , but the door was locked .
Retracing his steps past a vacant lot , the young man entered a shop where a colored man was employed in varnishing a coffin , which stood on two trestles in the middle of the floor .
Not at all impressed by the melancholy suggestiveness of his task , he was whistling a lively air with great gusto .
Upon Warwick 's entrance this effusion came to a sudden end , and the coffin-maker assumed an air of professional gravity .
" Good-mawnin ' , suh , " he said , lifting his cap politely .
" Good-morning , " answered Warwick .
" Can you tell me anything about Judge Straight 's office hours ? "
" De ole jedge has be 'n a little onreg ' lar sence de wah , suh ; but he gin ' ally gits roun ' ' bout ten o'clock er so .
He 's be 'n kin ' er feeble fer de las ' few yeahs .
An ' I reckon , " continued the undertaker solemnly , his glance unconsciously seeking a row of fine caskets standing against the wall , -- " I reckon he 'll soon be goin ' de way er all de earth .
' Man dat is bawn er ' oman hath but a sho ' t time ter lib , an ' is full er mis ' ry .
He cometh up an ' is cut down lack as a flower . '
' De days er his life is three-sco ' an ' ten ' -- an ' de ole jedge is libbed mo ' d' n dat , suh , by five yeahs , ter say de leas ' . " "
' Death , ' " quoted Warwick , with whose mood the undertaker 's remarks were in tune , " ' is the penalty that all must pay for the crime of living . ' "
" Dat 's a fac ' , suh , dat 's a fac ' ; so dey mus ' -- so dey mus ' .
An ' den all de dead has ter be buried .
An ' we does ou ' sheer of it , suh , we does ou ' sheer .
We conduc 's de obs ' quies er all de bes ' w ' ite folks er de town , suh . "
Warwick left the undertaker 's shop and retraced his steps until he had passed the lawyer 's office , toward which he threw an affectionate glance .
A few rods farther led him past the old black Presbyterian church , with its square tower , embowered in a stately grove ; past the Catholic church , with its many crosses , and a painted wooden figure of St. James in a recess beneath the gable ; and past the old Jefferson House , once the leading hotel of the town , in front of which political meetings had been held , and political speeches made , and political hard cider drunk , in the days of " Tippecanoe and Tyler too . "
The street down which Warwick had come intersected Front Street at a sharp angle in front of the old hotel , forming a sort of flatiron block at the junction , known as Liberty Point , -- perhaps because slave auctions were sometimes held there in the good old days .
Just before Warwick reached Liberty Point , a young woman came down Front Street from the direction of the market-house .
When their paths converged , Warwick kept on down Front Street behind her , it having been already his intention to walk in this direction .
Warwick 's first glance had revealed the fact that the young woman was strikingly handsome , with a stately beauty seldom encountered .
As he walked along behind her at a measured distance , he could not help noting the details that made up this pleasing impression , for his mind was singularly alive to beauty , in whatever embodiment .
The girl 's figure , he perceived , was admirably proportioned ; she was evidently at the period when the angles of childhood were rounding into the promising curves of adolescence .
Her abundant hair , of a dark and glossy brown , was neatly plaited and coiled above an ivory column that rose straight from a pair of gently sloping shoulders , clearly outlined beneath the light muslin frock that covered them .
He could see that she was tastefully , though not richly , dressed , and that she walked with an elastic step that revealed a light heart and the vigor of perfect health .
Her face , of course , he could not analyze , since he had caught only the one brief but convincing glimpse of it .
PROLOGUE I A FACE haunted Cameron -- a woman 's face .
It was there in the white heart of the dying campfire ; it hung in the shadows that hovered over the flickering light ; it drifted in the darkness beyond .
This hour , when the day had closed and the lonely desert night set in with its dead silence , was one in which Cameron 's mind was thronged with memories of a time long past -- of a home back in Peoria , of a woman he had wronged and lost , and loved too late .
He was a prospector for gold , a hunter of solitude , a lover of the drear , rock-ribbed infinitude , because he wanted to be alone to remember .
A sound disturbed Cameron 's reflections .
He bent his head listening .
A soft wind fanned the paling embers , blew sparks and white ashes and thin smoke away into the enshrouding circle of blackness .
His burro did not appear to be moving about .
The quiet split to the cry of a coyote .
It rose strange , wild , mournful -- not the howl of a prowling upland beast baying the campfire or barking at a lonely prospector , but the wail of a wolf , full-voiced , crying out the meaning of the desert and the night .
Hunger throbbed in it -- hunger for a mate , for offspring , for life .
When it ceased , the terrible desert silence smote Cameron , and the cry echoed in his soul .
He and that wandering wolf were brothers .
Then a sharp clink of metal on stone and soft pads of hoofs in sand prompted Cameron to reach for his gun , and to move out of the light of the waning campfire .
He was somewhere along the wild border line between Sonora and Arizona ; and the prospector who dared the heat and barrenness of that region risked other dangers sometimes as menacing .
Figures darker than the gloom approached and took shape , and in the light turned out to be those of a white man and a heavily packed burro .
" Hello there , " the man called , as he came to a halt and gazed about him .
" I saw your fire .
May I make camp here ? "
Cameron came forth out of the shadow and greeted his visitor , whom he took for a prospector like himself .
Cameron resented the breaking of his lonely campfire vigil , but he respected the law of the desert .
The stranger thanked him , and then slipped the pack from his burro .
Then he rolled out his pack and began preparations for a meal .
His movements were slow and methodical .
Cameron watched him , still with resentment , yet with a curious and growing interest .
The campfire burst into a bright blaze , and by its light Cameron saw a man whose gray hair somehow did not seem to make him old , and whose stooped shoulders did not detract from an impression of rugged strength .
" Find any mineral ? " asked Cameron , presently .
His visitor looked up quickly , as if startled by the sound of a human voice .
He replied , and then the two men talked a little .
But the stranger evidently preferred silence .
Cameron understood that .
He laughed grimly and bent a keener gaze upon the furrowed , shadowy face .
Another of those strange desert prospectors in whom there was some relentless driving power besides the lust for gold !
Cameron felt that between this man and himself there was a subtle affinity , vague and undefined , perhaps born of the divination that here was a desert wanderer like himself , perhaps born of a deeper , an unintelligible relation having its roots back in the past .
A long-forgotten sensation stirred in Cameron 's breast , one so long forgotten that he could not recognize it .
But it was akin to pain .
II When he awakened he found , to his surprise , that his companion had departed .
A trail in the sand led off to the north .
There was no water in that direction .
Cameron shrugged his shoulders ; it was not his affair ; he had his own problems .
And straightway he forgot his strange visitor .
Cameron began his day , grateful for the solitude that was now unbroken , for the canyon-furrowed and cactus-spired scene that now showed no sign of life .
He traveled southwest , never straying far from the dry stream bed ; and in a desultory way , without eagerness , he hunted for signs of gold .
The work was toilsome , yet the periods of rest in which he indulged were not taken because of fatigue .
He rested to look , to listen , to feel .
What the vast silent world meant to him had always been a mystical thing , which he felt in all its incalculable power , but never understood .
That day , while it was yet light , and he was digging in a moist white-bordered wash for water , he was brought sharply up by hearing the crack of hard hoofs on stone .
There down the canyon came a man and a burro .
Cameron recognized them .
" Hello , friend , " called the man , halting .
" Our trails crossed again .
That 's good . "
" Hello , " replied Cameron , slowly .
" Any mineral sign to-day ? "
" No . "
They made camp together , ate their frugal meal , smoked a pipe , and rolled in their blankets without exchanging many words .
In the morning the same reticence , the same aloofness characterized the manner of both .
But Cameron 's companion , when he had packed his burro and was ready to start , faced about and said : " We might stay together , if it 's all right with you . "
" I never take a partner , " replied Cameron .
" You 're alone ; I 'm alone , " said the other , mildly .
" It 's a big place .
If we find gold there 'll be enough for two . "
" I do n't go down into the desert for gold alone , " rejoined Cameron , with a chill note in his swift reply .
His companion 's deep-set , luminous eyes emitted a singular flash .
It moved Cameron to say that in the years of his wandering he had met no man who could endure equally with him the blasting heat , the blinding dust storms , the wilderness of sand and rock and lava and cactus , the terrible silence and desolation of the desert .
Cameron waved a hand toward the wide , shimmering , shadowy descent of plain and range .
" I may strike through the Sonora Desert .
I may head for Pinacate or north for the Colorado Basin .
You are an old man . "
" I do n't know the country , but to me one place is the same as another , " replied his companion .
For moments he seemed to forget himself , and swept his far-reaching gaze out over the colored gulf of stone and sand .
Then with gentle slaps he drove his burro in behind Cameron .
" Yes , I 'm old .
I 'm lonely , too .
It 's come to me just lately .
But , friend , I can still travel , and for a few days my company wo n't hurt you . "
" Have it your way , " said Cameron .
They began a slow march down into the desert .
At sunset they camped under the lee of a low mesa .
Cameron was glad his comrade had the Indian habit of silence .
Another day 's travel found the prospectors deep in the wilderness .
Then there came a breaking of reserve , noticeable in the elder man , almost imperceptibly gradual in Cameron .
Beside the meager mesquite campfire this gray-faced , thoughtful old prospector would remove his black pipe from his mouth to talk a little ; and Cameron would listen , and sometimes unlock his lips to speak a word .
And so , as Cameron began to respond to the influence of a desert less lonely than habitual , he began to take keener note of his comrade , and found him different from any other he had ever encountered in the wilderness .
This man never grumbled at the heat , the glare , the driving sand , the sour water , the scant fare .
During the daylight hours he was seldom idle .
At night he sat dreaming before the fire or paced to and fro in the gloom .
He slept but little , and that long after Cameron had had his own rest .
He was tireless , patient , brooding .
Cameron 's awakened interest brought home to him the realization that for years he had shunned companionship .
In those years only three men had wandered into the desert with him , and these had left their bones to bleach in the shifting sands .
Cameron had not cared to know their secrets .
But the more he studied this latest comrade the more he began to suspect that he might have missed something in the others .
In his own driving passion to take his secret into the limitless abode of silence and desolation , where he could be alone with it , he had forgotten that life dealt shocks to other men .
Somehow this silent comrade reminded him .
One afternoon late , after they had toiled up a white , winding wash of sand and gravel , they came upon a dry waterhole .
Cameron dug deep into the sand , but without avail .
He was turning to retrace weary steps back to the last water when his comrade asked him to wait .
Cameron watched him search in his pack and bring forth what appeared to be a small , forked branch of a peach tree .
He grasped the prongs of the fork and held them before him with the end standing straight out , and then he began to walk along the stream bed .
Cameron , at first amused , then amazed , then pitying , and at last curious , kept pace with the prospector .
He saw a strong tension of his comrade 's wrists , as if he was holding hard against a considerable force .
The end of the peach branch began to quiver and turn .
Cameron reached out a hand to touch it , and was astounded at feeling a powerful vibrant force pulling the branch downward .
He felt it as a magnetic shock .
The branch kept turning , and at length pointed to the ground .
" Dig here , " said the prospector .
" What ! " ejaculated Cameron .
Had the man lost his mind ?
Then Cameron stood by while his comrade dug in the sand .
Three feet he dug -- four -- five , and the sand grew dark , then moist .
At six feet water began to seep through .
" Get the little basket in my pack , " he said .
Cameron complied , and saw his comrade drop the basket into the deep hole , where it kept the sides from caving in and allowed the water to seep through .
While Cameron watched , the basket filled .
Of all the strange incidents of his desert career this was the strangest .
Curiously he picked up the peach branch and held it as he had seen it held .
The thing , however , was dead in his hands .
CHAPTER ONE PLAYING PILGRIMS " Christmas wo n't be Christmas without any presents , " grumbled Jo , lying on the rug .
" It 's so dreadful to be poor ! "
sighed Meg , looking down at her old dress .
" I do n't think it 's fair for some girls to have plenty of pretty things , and other girls nothing at all , " added little Amy , with an injured sniff .
" We 've got Father and Mother , and each other , " said Beth contentedly from her corner .
The four young faces on which the firelight shone brightened at the cheerful words , but darkened again as Jo said sadly , " We have n't got Father , and shall not have him for a long time . "
She did n't say " perhaps never , " but each silently added it , thinking of Father far away , where the fighting was .
Nobody spoke for a minute ; then Meg said in an altered tone , " You know the reason Mother proposed not having any presents this Christmas was because it is going to be a hard winter for everyone ; and she thinks we ought not to spend money for pleasure , when our men are suffering so in the army .
We ca n't do much , but we can make our little sacrifices , and ought to do it gladly .
But I am afraid I do n't , " and Meg shook her head , as she thought regretfully of all the pretty things she wanted .
" But I do n't think the little we should spend would do any good .
We 've each got a dollar , and the army would n't be much helped by our giving that .
I agree not to expect anything from Mother or you , but I do want to buy _ Undine and Sintran _ for myself .
I 've wanted it so long , " said Jo , who was a bookworm .
" I planned to spend mine in new music , " said Beth , with a little sigh , which no one heard but the hearth brush and kettle-holder .
" I shall get a nice box of Faber 's drawing pencils ; I really need them , " said Amy decidedly .
" Mother did n't say anything about our money , and she wo n't wish us to give up everything .
Let 's each buy what we want , and have a little fun ; I 'm sure we work hard enough to earn it , " cried Jo , examining the heels of her shoes in a gentlemanly manner .
" I know I do -- teaching those tiresome children nearly all day , when I 'm longing to enjoy myself at home , " began Meg , in the complaining tone again .
" You do n't have half such a hard time as I do , " said Jo .
" How would you like to be shut up for hours with a nervous , fussy old lady , who keeps you trotting , is never satisfied , and worries you till you 're ready to fly out the window or cry ? "
" It 's naughty to fret , but I do think washing dishes and keeping things tidy is the worst work in the world .
It makes me cross , and my hands get so stiff , I ca n't practice well at all . "
And Beth looked at her rough hands with a sigh that any one could hear that time .
" I do n't believe any of you suffer as I do , " cried Amy , " for you do n't have to go to school with impertinent girls , who plague you if you do n't know your lessons , and laugh at your dresses , and label your father if he is n't rich , and insult you when your nose is n't nice . "
" If you mean libel , I 'd say so , and not talk about labels , as if Papa was a pickle bottle , " advised Jo , laughing .
" I know what I mean , and you need n't be statirical about it .
It 's proper to use good words , and improve your vocabilary , " returned Amy , with dignity .
" Do n't peck at one another , children .
Do n't you wish we had the money Papa lost when we were little , Jo ?
Dear me !
How happy and good we 'd be , if we had no worries ! "
said Meg , who could remember better times .
" You said the other day you thought we were a deal happier than the King children , for they were fighting and fretting all the time , in spite of their money . "
" So I did , Beth .
Well , I think we are .
For though we do have to work , we make fun of ourselves , and are a pretty jolly set , as Jo would say . "
" Jo does use such slang words ! "
observed Amy , with a reproving look at the long figure stretched on the rug .
Jo immediately sat up , put her hands in her pockets , and began to whistle .
" Do n't , Jo .
It 's so boyish ! "
" That 's why I do it . "
" I detest rude , unladylike girls ! "
" I hate affected , niminy-piminy chits ! "
" Birds in their little nests agree , " sang Beth , the peacemaker , with such a funny face that both sharp voices softened to a laugh , and the " pecking " ended for that time .
" Really , girls , you are both to be blamed , " said Meg , beginning to lecture in her elder-sisterly fashion .
" You are old enough to leave off boyish tricks , and to behave better , Josephine .
It did n't matter so much when you were a little girl , but now you are so tall , and turn up your hair , you should remember that you are a young lady . "
" I 'm not !
And if turning up my hair makes me one , I 'll wear it in two tails till I 'm twenty , " cried Jo , pulling off her net , and shaking down a chestnut mane .
" I hate to think I 've got to grow up , and be Miss March , and wear long gowns , and look as prim as a China Aster !
It 's bad enough to be a girl , anyway , when I like boy 's games and work and manners !
I ca n't get over my disappointment in not being a boy .
And it 's worse than ever now , for I 'm dying to go and fight with Papa .
And I can only stay home and knit , like a poky old woman ! "
And Jo shook the blue army sock till the needles rattled like castanets , and her ball bounded across the room .
" Poor Jo !
It 's too bad , but it ca n't be helped .
So you must try to be contented with making your name boyish , and playing brother to us girls , " said Beth , stroking the rough head with a hand that all the dish washing and dusting in the world could not make ungentle in its touch .
" As for you , Amy , " continued Meg , " you are altogether too particular and prim .
Your airs are funny now , but you 'll grow up an affected little goose , if you do n't take care .
I like your nice manners and refined ways of speaking , when you do n't try to be elegant .
But your absurd words are as bad as Jo 's slang . "
" If Jo is a tomboy and Amy a goose , what am I , please ? "
asked Beth , ready to share the lecture .
" You 're a dear , and nothing else , " answered Meg warmly , and no one contradicted her , for the ' Mouse ' was the pet of the family .
As young readers like to know ' how people look ' , we will take this moment to give them a little sketch of the four sisters , who sat knitting away in the twilight , while the December snow fell quietly without , and the fire crackled cheerfully within .
It was a comfortable room , though the carpet was faded and the furniture very plain , for a good picture or two hung on the walls , books filled the recesses , chrysanthemums and Christmas roses bloomed in the windows , and a pleasant atmosphere of home peace pervaded it .
Margaret , the eldest of the four , was sixteen , and very pretty , being plump and fair , with large eyes , plenty of soft brown hair , a sweet mouth , and white hands , of which she was rather vain .
Fifteen-year-old Jo was very tall , thin , and brown , and reminded one of a colt , for she never seemed to know what to do with her long limbs , which were very much in her way .
She had a decided mouth , a comical nose , and sharp , gray eyes , which appeared to see everything , and were by turns fierce , funny , or thoughtful .
Her long , thick hair was her one beauty , but it was usually bundled into a net , to be out of her way .
Round shoulders had Jo , big hands and feet , a flyaway look to her clothes , and the uncomfortable appearance of a girl who was rapidly shooting up into a woman and did n't like it .
Elizabeth , or Beth , as everyone called her , was a rosy , smooth-haired , bright-eyed girl of thirteen , with a shy manner , a timid voice , and a peaceful expression which was seldom disturbed .
Her father called her ' Little Miss Tranquility ' , and the name suited her excellently , for she seemed to live in a happy world of her own , only venturing out to meet the few whom she trusted and loved .
Amy , though the youngest , was a most important person , in her own opinion at least .
A regular snow maiden , with blue eyes , and yellow hair curling on her shoulders , pale and slender , and always carrying herself like a young lady mindful of her manners .
What the characters of the four sisters were we will leave to be found out .
The clock struck six and , having swept up the hearth , Beth put a pair of slippers down to warm .
Somehow the sight of the old shoes had a good effect upon the girls , for Mother was coming , and everyone brightened to welcome her .
Meg stopped lecturing , and lighted the lamp , Amy got out of the easy chair without being asked , and Jo forgot how tired she was as she sat up to hold the slippers nearer to the blaze .
" They are quite worn out .
Marmee must have a new pair . "
" I thought I 'd get her some with my dollar , " said Beth .
CHAPTER I — START IN LIFE I was born in the year 1632 , in the city of York , of a good family , though not of that country , my father being a foreigner of Bremen , who settled first at Hull .
He got a good estate by merchandise , and leaving off his trade , lived afterwards at York , from whence he had married my mother , whose relations were named Robinson , a very good family in that country , and from whom I was called Robinson Kreutznaer ; but , by the usual corruption of words in England , we are now called — nay we call ourselves and write our name — Crusoe ; and so my companions always called me .
I had two elder brothers , one of whom was lieutenant-colonel to an English regiment of foot in Flanders , formerly commanded by the famous Colonel Lockhart , and was killed at the battle near Dunkirk against the Spaniards .
What became of my second brother I never knew , any more than my father or mother knew what became of me .
Being the third son of the family and not bred to any trade , my head began to be filled very early with rambling thoughts .
My father , who was very ancient , had given me a competent share of learning , as far as house-education and a country free school generally go , and designed me for the law ; but I would be satisfied with nothing but going to sea ; and my inclination to this led me so strongly against the will , nay , the commands of my father , and against all the entreaties and persuasions of my mother and other friends , that there seemed to be something fatal in that propensity of nature , tending directly to the life of misery which was to befall me .
My father , a wise and grave man , gave me serious and excellent counsel against what he foresaw was my design .
He called me one morning into his chamber , where he was confined by the gout , and expostulated very warmly with me upon this subject .
He asked me what reasons , more than a mere wandering inclination , I had for leaving father ’s house and my native country , where I might be well introduced , and had a prospect of raising my fortune by application and industry , with a life of ease and pleasure .
He told me it was men of desperate fortunes on one hand , or of aspiring , superior fortunes on the other , who went abroad upon adventures , to rise by enterprise , and make themselves famous in undertakings of a nature out of the common road ; that these things were all either too far above me or too far below me ; that mine was the middle state , or what might be called the upper station of low life , which he had found , by long experience , was the best state in the world , the most suited to human happiness , not exposed to the miseries and hardships , the labour and sufferings of the mechanic part of mankind , and not embarrassed with the pride , luxury , ambition , and envy of the upper part of mankind .
He told me I might judge of the happiness of this state by this one thing — viz .
that this was the state of life which all other people envied ; that kings have frequently lamented the miserable consequence of being born to great things , and wished they had been placed in the middle of the two extremes , between the mean and the great ; that the wise man gave his testimony to this , as the standard of felicity , when he prayed to have neither poverty nor riches .
He bade me observe it , and I should always find that the calamities of life were shared among the upper and lower part of mankind , but that the middle station had the fewest disasters , and was not exposed to so many vicissitudes as the higher or lower part of mankind ; nay , they were not subjected to so many distempers and uneasinesses , either of body or mind , as those were who , by vicious living , luxury , and extravagances on the one hand , or by hard labour , want of necessaries , and mean or insufficient diet on the other hand , bring distemper upon themselves by the natural consequences of their way of living ; that the middle station of life was calculated for all kind of virtue and all kind of enjoyments ; that peace and plenty were the handmaids of a middle fortune ; that temperance , moderation , quietness , health , society , all agreeable diversions , and all desirable pleasures , were the blessings attending the middle station of life ; that this way men went silently and smoothly through the world , and comfortably out of it , not embarrassed with the labours of the hands or of the head , not sold to a life of slavery for daily bread , nor harassed with perplexed circumstances , which rob the soul of peace and the body of rest , nor enraged with the passion of envy , or the secret burning lust of ambition for great things ; but , in easy circumstances , sliding gently through the world , and sensibly tasting the sweets of living , without the bitter ; feeling that they are happy , and learning by every day ’s experience to know it more sensibly .
After this he pressed me earnestly , and in the most affectionate manner , not to play the young man , nor to precipitate myself into miseries which nature , and the station of life I was born in , seemed to have provided against ; that I was under no necessity of seeking my bread ; that he would do well for me , and endeavour to enter me fairly into the station of life which he had just been recommending to me ; and that if I was not very easy and happy in the world , it must be my mere fate or fault that must hinder it ; and that he should have nothing to answer for , having thus discharged his duty in warning me against measures which he knew would be to my hurt ; in a word , that as he would do very kind things for me if I would stay and settle at home as he directed , so he would not have so much hand in my misfortunes as to give me any encouragement to go away ; and to close all , he told me I had my elder brother for an example , to whom he had used the same earnest persuasions to keep him from going into the Low Country wars , but could not prevail , his young desires prompting him to run into the army , where he was killed ; and though he said he would not cease to pray for me , yet he would venture to say to me , that if I did take this foolish step , God would not bless me , and I should have leisure hereafter to reflect upon having neglected his counsel when there might be none to assist in my recovery .
I observed in this last part of his discourse , which was truly prophetic , though I suppose my father did not know it to be so himself — I say , I observed the tears run down his face very plentifully , especially when he spoke of my brother who was killed : and that when he spoke of my having leisure to repent , and none to assist me , he was so moved that he broke off the discourse , and told me his heart was so full he could say no more to me .
I was sincerely affected with this discourse , and , indeed , who could be otherwise ?
and I resolved not to think of going abroad any more , but to settle at home according to my father ’s desire .
But alas !
a few days wore it all off ; and , in short , to prevent any of my father ’s further importunities , in a few weeks after I resolved to run quite away from him .
However , I did not act quite so hastily as the first heat of my resolution prompted ; but I took my mother at a time when I thought her a little more pleasant than ordinary , and told her that my thoughts were so entirely bent upon seeing the world that I should never settle to anything with resolution enough to go through with it , and my father had better give me his consent than force me to go without it ; that I was now eighteen years old , which was too late to go apprentice to a trade or clerk to an attorney ; that I was sure if I did I should never serve out my time , but I should certainly run away from my master before my time was out , and go to sea ; and if she would speak to my father to let me go one voyage abroad , if I came home again , and did not like it , I would go no more ; and I would promise , by a double diligence , to recover the time that I had lost .
This put my mother into a great passion ; she told me she knew it would be to no purpose to speak to my father upon any such subject ; that he knew too well what was my interest to give his consent to anything so much for my hurt ; and that she wondered how I could think of any such thing after the discourse I had had with my father , and such kind and tender expressions as she knew my father had used to me ; and that , in short , if I would ruin myself , there was no help for me ; but I might depend I should never have their consent to it ; that for her part she would not have so much hand in my destruction ; and I should never have it to say that my mother was willing when my father was not .
Though my mother refused to move it to my father , yet I heard afterwards that she reported all the discourse to him , and that my father , after showing a great concern at it , said to her , with a sigh , “ That boy might be happy if he would stay at home ; but if he goes abroad , he will be the most miserable wretch that ever was born : I can give no consent to it . ”
It was not till almost a year after this that I broke loose , though , in the meantime , I continued obstinately deaf to all proposals of settling to business , and frequently expostulated with my father and mother about their being so positively determined against what they knew my inclinations prompted me to .
But being one day at Hull , where I went casually , and without any purpose of making an elopement at that time ; but , I say , being there , and one of my companions being about to sail to London in his father ’s ship , and prompting me to go with them with the common allurement of seafaring men , that it should cost me nothing for my passage , I consulted neither father nor mother any more , nor so much as sent them word of it ; but leaving them to hear of it as they might , without asking God ’s blessing or my father ’s , without any consideration of circumstances or consequences , and in an ill hour , God knows , on the 1st of September 1651 , I went on board a ship bound for London .
Never any young adventurer ’s misfortunes , I believe , began sooner , or continued longer than mine .
The ship was no sooner out of the Humber than the wind began to blow and the sea to rise in a most frightful manner ; and , as I had never been at sea before , I was most inexpressibly sick in body and terrified in mind .
I began now seriously to reflect upon what I had done , and how justly I was overtaken by the judgment of Heaven for my wicked leaving my father ’s house , and abandoning my duty .
All the good counsels of my parents , my father ’s tears and my mother ’s entreaties , came now fresh into my mind ; and my conscience , which was not yet come to the pitch of hardness to which it has since , reproached me with the contempt of advice , and the breach of my duty to God and my father .
CHAPTER I THE STRANGE MAN 'S ARRIVAL The stranger came early in February , one wintry day , through a biting wind and a driving snow , the last snowfall of the year , over the down , walking from Bramblehurst railway station , and carrying a little black portmanteau in his thickly gloved hand .
He was wrapped up from head to foot , and the brim of his soft felt hat hid every inch of his face but the shiny tip of his nose ; the snow had piled itself against his shoulders and chest , and added a white crest to the burden he carried .
He staggered into the " Coach and Horses " more dead than alive , and flung his portmanteau down .
" A fire , " he cried , " in the name of human charity !
A room and a fire ! "
He stamped and shook the snow from off himself in the bar , and followed Mrs. Hall into her guest parlour to strike his bargain .
And with that much introduction , that and a couple of sovereigns flung upon the table , he took up his quarters in the inn .
Mrs. Hall lit the fire and left him there while she went to prepare him a meal with her own hands .
A guest to stop at Iping in the wintertime was an unheard-of piece of luck , let alone a guest who was no " haggler , " and she was resolved to show herself worthy of her good fortune .
As soon as the bacon was well under way , and Millie , her lymphatic maid , had been brisked up a bit by a few deftly chosen expressions of contempt , she carried the cloth , plates , and glasses into the parlour and began to lay them with the utmost _ eclat _ .
Although the fire was burning up briskly , she was surprised to see that her visitor still wore his hat and coat , standing with his back to her and staring out of the window at the falling snow in the yard .
His gloved hands were clasped behind him , and he seemed to be lost in thought .
She noticed that the melting snow that still sprinkled his shoulders dripped upon her carpet .
" Can I take your hat and coat , sir ? " she said , " and give them a good dry in the kitchen ? "
" No , " he said without turning .
She was not sure she had heard him , and was about to repeat her question .
He turned his head and looked at her over his shoulder .
" I prefer to keep them on , " he said with emphasis , and she noticed that he wore big blue spectacles with sidelights , and had a bush side-whisker over his coat-collar that completely hid his cheeks and face .
" Very well , sir , " she said . "
_ As _ you like .
In a bit the room will be warmer . "
He made no answer , and had turned his face away from her again , and Mrs. Hall , feeling that her conversational advances were ill-timed , laid the rest of the table things in a quick staccato and whisked out of the room .
When she returned he was still standing there , like a man of stone , his back hunched , his collar turned up , his dripping hat-brim turned down , hiding his face and ears completely .
She put down the eggs and bacon with considerable emphasis , and called rather than said to him , " Your lunch is served , sir . "
" Thank you , " he said at the same time , and did not stir until she was closing the door .
Then he swung round and approached the table with a certain eager quickness .
As she went behind the bar to the kitchen she heard a sound repeated at regular intervals .
Chirk , chirk , chirk , it went , the sound of a spoon being rapidly whisked round a basin .
" That girl ! " she said .
" There !
I clean forgot it .
It 's her being so long ! "
And while she herself finished mixing the mustard , she gave Millie a few verbal stabs for her excessive slowness .
She had cooked the ham and eggs , laid the table , and done everything , while Millie ( help indeed ! )
had only succeeded in delaying the mustard .
And him a new guest and wanting to stay !
Then she filled the mustard pot , and , putting it with a certain stateliness upon a gold and black tea-tray , carried it into the parlour .
She rapped and entered promptly .
As she did so her visitor moved quickly , so that she got but a glimpse of a white object disappearing behind the table .
It would seem he was picking something from the floor .
She rapped down the mustard pot on the table , and then she noticed the overcoat and hat had been taken off and put over a chair in front of the fire , and a pair of wet boots threatened rust to her steel fender .
She went to these things resolutely .
" I suppose I may have them to dry now , " she said in a voice that brooked no denial .
" Leave the hat , " said her visitor , in a muffled voice , and turning she saw he had raised his head and was sitting and looking at her .
For a moment she stood gaping at him , too surprised to speak .
He held a white cloth -- it was a serviette he had brought with him -- over the lower part of his face , so that his mouth and jaws were completely hidden , and that was the reason of his muffled voice .
But it was not that which startled Mrs. Hall .
It was the fact that all his forehead above his blue glasses was covered by a white bandage , and that another covered his ears , leaving not a scrap of his face exposed excepting only his pink , peaked nose .
It was bright , pink , and shiny just as it had been at first .
He wore a dark-brown velvet jacket with a high , black , linen-lined collar turned up about his neck .
The thick black hair , escaping as it could below and between the cross bandages , projected in curious tails and horns , giving him the strangest appearance conceivable .
This muffled and bandaged head was so unlike what she had anticipated , that for a moment she was rigid .
He did not remove the serviette , but remained holding it , as she saw now , with a brown gloved hand , and regarding her with his inscrutable blue glasses .
" Leave the hat , " he said , speaking very distinctly through the white cloth .
Her nerves began to recover from the shock they had received .
She placed the hat on the chair again by the fire .
" I did n't know , sir , " she began , " that -- " and she stopped embarrassed .
" Thank you , " he said drily , glancing from her to the door and then at her again .
" I 'll have them nicely dried , sir , at once , " she said , and carried his clothes out of the room .
She glanced at his white-swathed head and blue goggles again as she was going out of the door ; but his napkin was still in front of his face .
She shivered a little as she closed the door behind her , and her face was eloquent of her surprise and perplexity .
" I _ never _ , " she whispered .
" There ! "
She went quite softly to the kitchen , and was too preoccupied to ask Millie what she was messing about with _ now _ , when she got there .
The visitor sat and listened to her retreating feet .
He glanced inquiringly at the window before he removed his serviette , and resumed his meal .
He took a mouthful , glanced suspiciously at the window , took another mouthful , then rose and , taking the serviette in his hand , walked across the room and pulled the blind down to the top of the white muslin that obscured the lower panes .
This left the room in a twilight .
This done , he returned with an easier air to the table and his meal .
" The poor soul 's had an accident or an op ' ration or somethin' , " said Mrs. Hall .
" What a turn them bandages did give me , to be sure ! "
She put on some more coal , unfolded the clothes-horse , and extended the traveller 's coat upon this .
" And they goggles !
Why , he looked more like a divin ' helmet than a human man ! "
She hung his muffler on a corner of the horse .
" And holding that handkerchief over his mouth all the time .
Talkin ' through it !
... Perhaps his mouth was hurt too -- maybe . "
She turned round , as one who suddenly remembers .
" Bless my soul alive ! " she said , going off at a tangent ; " ai n't you done them taters _ yet _ , Millie ? "
When Mrs. Hall went to clear away the stranger 's lunch , her idea that his mouth must also have been cut or disfigured in the accident she supposed him to have suffered , was confirmed , for he was smoking a pipe , and all the time that she was in the room he never loosened the silk muffler he had wrapped round the lower part of his face to put the mouthpiece to his lips .
Yet it was not forgetfulness , for she saw he glanced at it as it smouldered out .
He sat in the corner with his back to the window-blind and spoke now , having eaten and drunk and being comfortably warmed through , with less aggressive brevity than before .
The reflection of the fire lent a kind of red animation to his big spectacles they had lacked hitherto .
" I have some luggage , " he said , " at Bramblehurst station , " and he asked her how he could have it sent .
He bowed his bandaged head quite politely in acknowledgment of her explanation .
" To-morrow ? " he said .
" There is no speedier delivery ? " and seemed quite disappointed when she answered , " No . "
Was she quite sure ?
No man with a trap who would go over ?
Mrs. Hall , nothing loath , answered his questions and developed a conversation .
" It 's a steep road by the down , sir , " she said in answer to the question about a trap ; and then , snatching at an opening , said , " It was there a carriage was upsettled , a year ago and more .
A gentleman killed , besides his coachman .
Accidents , sir , happen in a moment , do n't they ? "
But the visitor was not to be drawn so easily .
" They do , " he said through his muffler , eyeing her quietly through his impenetrable glasses .
CHAPTER I RAGGED DICK IS INTRODUCED TO THE READER " Wake up there , youngster , " said a rough voice .
Ragged Dick opened his eyes slowly , and stared stupidly in the face of the speaker , but did not offer to get up .
" Wake up , you young vagabond ! "
said the man a little impatiently ; " I suppose you 'd lay there all day , if I had n't called you . "
" What time is it ? "
asked Dick .
" Seven o'clock . "
" Seven o'clock !
I oughter 've been up an hour ago .
I know what 't was made me so precious sleepy .
I went to the Old Bowery last night , and did n't turn in till past twelve . "
" You went to the Old Bowery ?
Where 'd you get your money ? "
asked the man , who was a porter in the employ of a firm doing business on Spruce Street .
" Made it by shines , in course .
My guardian do n't allow me no money for theatres , so I have to earn it . "
" Some boys get it easier than that , " said the porter significantly .
" You do n't catch me stealin ' , if that 's what you mean , " said Dick .
" Do n't you ever steal , then ? "
" No , and I would n't .
Lots of boys does it , but I would n't . "
" Well , I 'm glad to hear you say that .
I believe there 's some good in you , Dick , after all . "
" Oh , I 'm a rough customer ! "
said Dick .
" But I would n't steal .
It 's mean . "
" I 'm glad you think so , Dick , " and the rough voice sounded gentler than at first .
" Have you got any money to buy your breakfast ? "
" No , but I 'll soon get some . "
While this conversation had been going on , Dick had got up .
His bedchamber had been a wooden box half full of straw , on which the young boot-black had reposed his weary limbs , and slept as soundly as if it had been a bed of down .
He dumped down into the straw without taking the trouble of undressing .
Getting up too was an equally short process .
He jumped out of the box , shook himself , picked out one or two straws that had found their way into rents in his clothes , and , drawing a well-worn cap over his uncombed locks , he was all ready for the business of the day .
Dick 's appearance as he stood beside the box was rather peculiar .
His pants were torn in several places , and had apparently belonged in the first instance to a boy two sizes larger than himself .
He wore a vest , all the buttons of which were gone except two , out of which peeped a shirt which looked as if it had been worn a month .
To complete his costume he wore a coat too long for him , dating back , if one might judge from its general appearance , to a remote antiquity .
Washing the face and hands is usually considered proper in commencing the day , but Dick was above such refinement .
He had no particular dislike to dirt , and did not think it necessary to remove several dark streaks on his face and hands .
But in spite of his dirt and rags there was something about Dick that was attractive .
It was easy to see that if he had been clean and well dressed he would have been decidedly good-looking .
Some of his companions were sly , and their faces inspired distrust ; but Dick had a frank , straight-forward manner that made him a favorite .
Dick 's business hours had commenced .
He had no office to open .
His little blacking-box was ready for use , and he looked sharply in the faces of all who passed , addressing each with , " Shine yer boots , sir ? "
" How much ? "
asked a gentleman on his way to his office .
" Ten cents , " said Dick , dropping his box , and sinking upon his knees on the sidewalk , flourishing his brush with the air of one skilled in his profession .
" Ten cents !
Is n't that a little steep ? "
" Well , you know ' taint all clear profit , " said Dick , who had already set to work .
" There 's the _ blacking _ costs something , and I have to get a new brush pretty often . "
" And you have a large rent too , " said the gentleman quizzically , with a glance at a large hole in Dick 's coat .
" Yes , sir , " said Dick , always ready to joke ; " I have to pay such a big rent for my manshun up on Fifth Avenoo , that I ca n't afford to take less than ten cents a shine .
I 'll give you a bully shine , sir . "
" Be quick about it , for I am in a hurry .
So your house is on Fifth Avenue , is it ? "
" It is n't anywhere else , " said Dick , and Dick spoke the truth there .
" What tailor do you patronize ? "
asked the gentleman , surveying Dick 's attire .
" Would you like to go to the same one ? "
asked Dick , shrewdly .
" Well , no ; it strikes me that he did n't give you a very good fit . "
" This coat once belonged to General Washington , " said Dick , comically .
" He wore it all through the Revolution , and it got torn some , 'cause he fit so hard .
When he died he told his widder to give it to some smart young feller that had n't got none of his own ; so she gave it to me .
But if you 'd like it , sir , to remember General Washington by , I 'll let you have it reasonable . "
" Thank you , but I would n't want to deprive you of it .
And did your pants come from General Washington too ? "
" No , they was a gift from Lewis Napoleon .
Lewis had outgrown 'em and sent 'em to me , -- he 's bigger than me , and that 's why they do n't fit . "
" It seems you have distinguished friends .
Now , my lad , I suppose you would like your money . "
" I should n't have any objection , " said Dick .
" I believe , " said the gentleman , examining his pocket-book , " I have n't got anything short of twenty-five cents .
Have you got any change ? "
" Not a cent , " said Dick .
" All my money 's invested in the Erie Railroad . "
" That 's unfortunate . "
" Shall I get the money changed , sir ? "
" I ca n't wait ; I 've got to meet an appointment immediately .
I 'll hand you twenty-five cents , and you can leave the change at my office any time during the day . "
" All right , sir .
Where is it ? "
" No. 125 Fulton Street .
Shall you remember ? "
" Yes , sir .
What name ? "
" Greyson , -- office on second floor . "
" All right , sir ; I 'll bring it . "
" I wonder whether the little scamp will prove honest , " said Mr. Greyson to himself , as he walked away .
" If he does , I 'll give him my custom regularly .
If he do n't as is most likely , I sha n't mind the loss of fifteen cents . "
Mr. Greyson did n't understand Dick .
Our ragged hero was n't a model boy in all respects .
I am afraid he swore sometimes , and now and then he played tricks upon unsophisticated boys from the country , or gave a wrong direction to honest old gentlemen unused to the city .
A clergyman in search of the Cooper Institute he once directed to the Tombs Prison , and , following him unobserved , was highly delighted when the unsuspicious stranger walked up the front steps of the great stone building on Centre Street , and tried to obtain admission .
" I guess he would n't want to stay long if he did get in , " thought Ragged Dick , hitching up his pants .
" Leastways I should n't .
They 're so precious glad to see you that they wo n't let you go , but board you gratooitous , and never send in no bills . "
Another of Dick 's faults was his extravagance .
Being always wide-awake and ready for business , he earned enough to have supported him comfortably and respectably .
There were not a few young clerks who employed Dick from time to time in his professional capacity , who scarcely earned as much as he , greatly as their style and dress exceeded his .
But Dick was careless of his earnings .
Where they went he could hardly have told himself .
However much he managed to earn during the day , all was generally spent before morning .
He was fond of going to the Old Bowery Theatre , and to Tony Pastor 's , and if he had any money left afterwards , he would invite some of his friends in somewhere to have an oyster-stew ; so it seldom happened that he commenced the day with a penny .
Then I am sorry to add that Dick had formed the habit of smoking .
This cost him considerable , for Dick was rather fastidious about his cigars , and would n't smoke the cheapest .
Besides , having a liberal nature , he was generally ready to treat his companions .
But of course the expense was the smallest objection .
No boy of fourteen can smoke without being affected injuriously .
Men are frequently injured by smoking , and boys always .
But large numbers of the newsboys and boot-blacks form the habit .
Exposed to the cold and wet they find that it warms them up , and the self-indulgence grows upon them .
It is not uncommon to see a little boy , too young to be out of his mother 's sight , smoking with all the apparent satisfaction of a veteran smoker .
There was another way in which Dick sometimes lost money .
There was a noted gambling-house on Baxter Street , which in the evening was sometimes crowded with these juvenile gamesters , who staked their hard earnings , generally losing of course , and refreshing themselves from time to time with a vile mixture of liquor at two cents a glass .
Sometimes Dick strayed in here , and played with the rest .
I have mentioned Dick 's faults and defects , because I want it understood , to begin with , that I do n't consider him a model boy .
But there were some good points about him nevertheless .
He was above doing anything mean or dishonorable .
He would not steal , or cheat , or impose upon younger boys , but was frank and straight-forward , manly and self-reliant .
His nature was a noble one , and had saved him from all mean faults .
I hope my young readers will like him as I do , without being blind to his faults .
Perhaps , although he was only a boot-black , they may find something in him to imitate .
Book I I. On a January evening of the early seventies , Christine Nilsson was singing in Faust at the Academy of Music in New York .
Though there was already talk of the erection , in remote metropolitan distances " above the Forties , " of a new Opera House which should compete in costliness and splendour with those of the great European capitals , the world of fashion was still content to reassemble every winter in the shabby red and gold boxes of the sociable old Academy .
Conservatives cherished it for being small and inconvenient , and thus keeping out the " new people " whom New York was beginning to dread and yet be drawn to ; and the sentimental clung to it for its historic associations , and the musical for its excellent acoustics , always so problematic a quality in halls built for the hearing of music .
It was Madame Nilsson 's first appearance that winter , and what the daily press had already learned to describe as " an exceptionally brilliant audience " had gathered to hear her , transported through the slippery , snowy streets in private broughams , in the spacious family landau , or in the humbler but more convenient " Brown coupe . "
To come to the Opera in a Brown coupe was almost as honourable a way of arriving as in one 's own carriage ; and departure by the same means had the immense advantage of enabling one ( with a playful allusion to democratic principles ) to scramble into the first Brown conveyance in the line , instead of waiting till the cold-and-gin congested nose of one 's own coachman gleamed under the portico of the Academy .
It was one of the great livery-stableman 's most masterly intuitions to have discovered that Americans want to get away from amusement even more quickly than they want to get to it .
When Newland Archer opened the door at the back of the club box the curtain had just gone up on the garden scene .
There was no reason why the young man should not have come earlier , for he had dined at seven , alone with his mother and sister , and had lingered afterward over a cigar in the Gothic library with glazed black-walnut bookcases and finial-topped chairs which was the only room in the house where Mrs. Archer allowed smoking .
But , in the first place , New York was a metropolis , and perfectly aware that in metropolises it was " not the thing " to arrive early at the opera ; and what was or was not " the thing " played a part as important in Newland Archer 's New York as the inscrutable totem terrors that had ruled the destinies of his forefathers thousands of years ago .
The second reason for his delay was a personal one .
He had dawdled over his cigar because he was at heart a dilettante , and thinking over a pleasure to come often gave him a subtler satisfaction than its realisation .
This was especially the case when the pleasure was a delicate one , as his pleasures mostly were ; and on this occasion the moment he looked forward to was so rare and exquisite in quality that -- well , if he had timed his arrival in accord with the prima donna 's stage-manager he could not have entered the Academy at a more significant moment than just as she was singing : " He loves me -- he loves me not -- HE LOVES ME !
-- " and sprinkling the falling daisy petals with notes as clear as dew .
She sang , of course , " M'ama ! "
and not " he loves me , " since an unalterable and unquestioned law of the musical world required that the German text of French operas sung by Swedish artists should be translated into Italian for the clearer understanding of English-speaking audiences .
This seemed as natural to Newland Archer as all the other conventions on which his life was moulded : such as the duty of using two silver-backed brushes with his monogram in blue enamel to part his hair , and of never appearing in society without a flower ( preferably a gardenia ) in his buttonhole .
" M'ama ... non m ' ama ... " the prima donna sang , and " M'ama ! "
, with a final burst of love triumphant , as she pressed the dishevelled daisy to her lips and lifted her large eyes to the sophisticated countenance of the little brown Faust-Capoul , who was vainly trying , in a tight purple velvet doublet and plumed cap , to look as pure and true as his artless victim .
Newland Archer , leaning against the wall at the back of the club box , turned his eyes from the stage and scanned the opposite side of the house .
Directly facing him was the box of old Mrs. Manson Mingott , whose monstrous obesity had long since made it impossible for her to attend the Opera , but who was always represented on fashionable nights by some of the younger members of the family .
On this occasion , the front of the box was filled by her daughter-in-law , Mrs. Lovell Mingott , and her daughter , Mrs. Welland ; and slightly withdrawn behind these brocaded matrons sat a young girl in white with eyes ecstatically fixed on the stagelovers .
As Madame Nilsson 's " M'ama ! "
thrilled out above the silent house ( the boxes always stopped talking during the Daisy Song ) a warm pink mounted to the girl 's cheek , mantled her brow to the roots of her fair braids , and suffused the young slope of her breast to the line where it met a modest tulle tucker fastened with a single gardenia .
She dropped her eyes to the immense bouquet of lilies-of-the-valley on her knee , and Newland Archer saw her white-gloved finger-tips touch the flowers softly .
He drew a breath of satisfied vanity and his eyes returned to the stage .
No expense had been spared on the setting , which was acknowledged to be very beautiful even by people who shared his acquaintance with the Opera houses of Paris and Vienna .
The foreground , to the footlights , was covered with emerald green cloth .
In the middle distance symmetrical mounds of woolly green moss bounded by croquet hoops formed the base of shrubs shaped like orange-trees but studded with large pink and red roses .
Gigantic pansies , considerably larger than the roses , and closely resembling the floral pen-wipers made by female parishioners for fashionable clergymen , sprang from the moss beneath the rose-trees ; and here and there a daisy grafted on a rose-branch flowered with a luxuriance prophetic of Mr. Luther Burbank 's far-off prodigies .
In the centre of this enchanted garden Madame Nilsson , in white cashmere slashed with pale blue satin , a reticule dangling from a blue girdle , and large yellow braids carefully disposed on each side of her muslin chemisette , listened with downcast eyes to M. Capoul 's impassioned wooing , and affected a guileless incomprehension of his designs whenever , by word or glance , he persuasively indicated the ground floor window of the neat brick villa projecting obliquely from the right wing .
" The darling ! "
thought Newland Archer , his glance flitting back to the young girl with the lilies-of-the-valley .
" She does n't even guess what it 's all about . "
And he contemplated her absorbed young face with a thrill of possessorship in which pride in his own masculine initiation was mingled with a tender reverence for her abysmal purity .
" We 'll read Faust together ... by the Italian lakes ... " he thought , somewhat hazily confusing the scene of his projected honey-moon with the masterpieces of literature which it would be his manly privilege to reveal to his bride .
It was only that afternoon that May Welland had let him guess that she " cared " ( New York 's consecrated phrase of maiden avowal ) , and already his imagination , leaping ahead of the engagement ring , the betrothal kiss and the march from Lohengrin , pictured her at his side in some scene of old European witchery .
He did not in the least wish the future Mrs. Newland Archer to be a simpleton .
He meant her ( thanks to his enlightening companionship ) to develop a social tact and readiness of wit enabling her to hold her own with the most popular married women of the " younger set , " in which it was the recognised custom to attract masculine homage while playfully discouraging it .
If he had probed to the bottom of his vanity ( as he sometimes nearly did ) he would have found there the wish that his wife should be as worldly-wise and as eager to please as the married lady whose charms had held his fancy through two mildly agitated years ; without , of course , any hint of the frailty which had so nearly marred that unhappy being 's life , and had disarranged his own plans for a whole winter .
How this miracle of fire and ice was to be created , and to sustain itself in a harsh world , he had never taken the time to think out ; but he was content to hold his view without analysing it , since he knew it was that of all the carefully-brushed , white-waistcoated , button-hole-flowered gentlemen who succeeded each other in the club box , exchanged friendly greetings with him , and turned their opera-glasses critically on the circle of ladies who were the product of the system .
In matters intellectual and artistic Newland Archer felt himself distinctly the superior of these chosen specimens of old New York gentility ; he had probably read more , thought more , and even seen a good deal more of the world , than any other man of the number .
Singly they betrayed their inferiority ; but grouped together they represented " New York , " and the habit of masculine solidarity made him accept their doctrine on all the issues called moral .
He instinctively felt that in this respect it would be troublesome -- and also rather bad form -- to strike out for himself .
" Well -- upon my soul ! "
exclaimed Lawrence Lefferts , turning his opera-glass abruptly away from the stage .
Lawrence Lefferts was , on the whole , the foremost authority on " form " in New York .
He had probably devoted more time than any one else to the study of this intricate and fascinating question ; but study alone could not account for his complete and easy competence .
One had only to look at him , from the slant of his bald forehead and the curve of his beautiful fair moustache to the long patent-leather feet at the other end of his lean and elegant person , to feel that the knowledge of " form " must be congenital in any one who knew how to wear such good clothes so carelessly and carry such height with so much lounging grace .
As a young admirer had once said of him : " If anybody can tell a fellow just when to wear a black tie with evening clothes and when not to , it 's Larry Lefferts . "
And on the question of pumps versus patent-leather " Oxfords " his authority had never been disputed .
" My God ! "
he said ; and silently handed his glass to old Sillerton Jackson .
CHAPTER I I ON a hill by the Mississippi where Chippewas camped two generations ago , a girl stood in relief against the cornflower blue of Northern sky .
She saw no Indians now ; she saw flour-mills and the blinking windows of skyscrapers in Minneapolis and St. Paul .
Nor was she thinking of squaws and portages , and the Yankee fur-traders whose shadows were all about her .
She was meditating upon walnut fudge , the plays of Brieux , the reasons why heels run over , and the fact that the chemistry instructor had stared at the new coiffure which concealed her ears .
A breeze which had crossed a thousand miles of wheat-lands bellied her taffeta skirt in a line so graceful , so full of animation and moving beauty , that the heart of a chance watcher on the lower road tightened to wistfulness over her quality of suspended freedom .
She lifted her arms , she leaned back against the wind , her skirt dipped and flared , a lock blew wild .
A girl on a hilltop ; credulous , plastic , young ; drinking the air as she longed to drink life .
The eternal aching comedy of expectant youth .
It is Carol Milford , fleeing for an hour from Blodgett College .
The days of pioneering , of lassies in sunbonnets , and bears killed with axes in piney clearings , are deader now than Camelot ; and a rebellious girl is the spirit of that bewildered empire called the American Middlewest .
II Blodgett College is on the edge of Minneapolis .
It is a bulwark of sound religion .
It is still combating the recent heresies of Voltaire , Darwin , and Robert Ingersoll .
Pious families in Minnesota , Iowa , Wisconsin , the Dakotas send their children thither , and Blodgett protects them from the wickedness of the universities .
But it secretes friendly girls , young men who sing , and one lady instructress who really likes Milton and Carlyle .
So the four years which Carol spent at Blodgett were not altogether wasted .
The smallness of the school , the fewness of rivals , permitted her to experiment with her perilous versatility .
She played tennis , gave chafing-dish parties , took a graduate seminar in the drama , went “ twosing , ” and joined half a dozen societies for the practise of the arts or the tense stalking of a thing called General Culture .
In her class there were two or three prettier girls , but none more eager .
She was noticeable equally in the classroom grind and at dances , though out of the three hundred students of Blodgett , scores recited more accurately and dozens Bostoned more smoothly .
Every cell of her body was alive -- thin wrists , quince-blossom skin , ingenue eyes , black hair .
The other girls in her dormitory marveled at the slightness of her body when they saw her in sheer negligee , or darting out wet from a shower-bath .
She seemed then but half as large as they had supposed ; a fragile child who must be cloaked with understanding kindness .
“ Psychic , ” the girls whispered , and “ spiritual . ”
Yet so radioactive were her nerves , so adventurous her trust in rather vaguely conceived sweetness and light , that she was more energetic than any of the hulking young women who , with calves bulging in heavy-ribbed woolen stockings beneath decorous blue serge bloomers , thuddingly galloped across the floor of the “ gym ” in practise for the Blodgett Ladies ’ Basket-Ball Team .
Even when she was tired her dark eyes were observant .
She did not yet know the immense ability of the world to be casually cruel and proudly dull , but if she should ever learn those dismaying powers , her eyes would never become sullen or heavy or rheumily amorous .
For all her enthusiasms , for all the fondness and the “ crushes ” which she inspired , Carol ’s acquaintances were shy of her .
When she was most ardently singing hymns or planning deviltry she yet seemed gently aloof and critical .
She was credulous , perhaps ; a born hero-worshipper ; yet she did question and examine unceasingly .
Whatever she might become she would never be static .
Her versatility ensnared her .
By turns she hoped to discover that she had an unusual voice , a talent for the piano , the ability to act , to write , to manage organizations .
Always she was disappointed , but always she effervesced anew -- over the Student Volunteers , who intended to become missionaries , over painting scenery for the dramatic club , over soliciting advertisements for the college magazine .
She was on the peak that Sunday afternoon when she played in chapel .
Out of the dusk her violin took up the organ theme , and the candle-light revealed her in a straight golden frock , her arm arched to the bow , her lips serious .
Every man fell in love then with religion and Carol .
Throughout Senior year she anxiously related all her experiments and partial successes to a career .
Daily , on the library steps or in the hall of the Main Building , the co-eds talked of “ What shall we do when we finish college ? ”
Even the girls who knew that they were going to be married pretended to be considering important business positions ; even they who knew that they would have to work hinted about fabulous suitors .
As for Carol , she was an orphan ; her only near relative was a vanilla-flavored sister married to an optician in St. Paul .
She had used most of the money from her father ’s estate .
She was not in love -- that is , not often , nor ever long at a time .
She would earn her living .
But how she was to earn it , how she was to conquer the world -- almost entirely for the world ’s own good -- she did not see .
Most of the girls who were not betrothed meant to be teachers .
Of these there were two sorts : careless young women who admitted that they intended to leave the “ beastly classroom and grubby children ” the minute they had a chance to marry ; and studious , sometimes bulbous-browed and pop-eyed maidens who at class prayer-meetings requested God to “ guide their feet along the paths of greatest usefulness . ”
Neither sort tempted Carol .
The former seemed insincere ( a favorite word of hers at this era ) .
The earnest virgins were , she fancied , as likely to do harm as to do good by their faith in the value of parsing Caesar .
At various times during Senior year Carol finally decided upon studying law , writing motion-picture scenarios , professional nursing , and marrying an unidentified hero .
Then she found a hobby in sociology .
The sociology instructor was new .
He was married , and therefore taboo , but he had come from Boston , he had lived among poets and socialists and Jews and millionaire uplifters at the University Settlement in New York , and he had a beautiful white strong neck .
He led a giggling class through the prisons , the charity bureaus , the employment agencies of Minneapolis and St. Paul .
Trailing at the end of the line Carol was indignant at the prodding curiosity of the others , their manner of staring at the poor as at a Zoo .
She felt herself a great liberator .
She put her hand to her mouth , her forefinger and thumb quite painfully pinching her lower lip , and frowned , and enjoyed being aloof .
A classmate named Stewart Snyder , a competent bulky young man in a gray flannel shirt , a rusty black bow tie , and the green-and-purple class cap , grumbled to her as they walked behind the others in the muck of the South St. Paul stockyards , “ These college chumps make me tired .
They ’re so top-lofty .
They ought to of worked on the farm , the way I have .
These workmen put it all over them . ”
“ I just love common workmen , ” glowed Carol .
“ Only you do n’t want to forget that common workmen do n’t think they ’re common ! ”
“ You ’re right !
I apologize ! ”
Carol ’s brows lifted in the astonishment of emotion , in a glory of abasement .
Her eyes mothered the world .
Stewart Snyder peered at her .
He rammed his large red fists into his pockets , he jerked them out , he resolutely got rid of them by clenching his hands behind him , and he stammered : “ I know .
You _ get _ people .
Most of these darn co-eds ---- Say , Carol , you could do a lot for people . ”
“ Oh -- oh well -- you know -- sympathy and everything -- if you were -- say you were a lawyer ’s wife .
You ’d understand his clients .
I ’m going to be a lawyer .
I admit I fall down in sympathy sometimes .
I get so dog-gone impatient with people that ca n’t stand the gaff .
You ’d be good for a fellow that was too serious .
Make him more -- more -- YOU know -- sympathetic ! ”
His slightly pouting lips , his mastiff eyes , were begging her to beg him to go on .
She fled from the steam-roller of his sentiment .
She cried , “ Oh , see those poor sheep -- millions and millions of them . ”
She darted on .
Stewart was not interesting .
He had n’t a shapely white neck , and he had never lived among celebrated reformers .
She wanted , just now , to have a cell in a settlement-house , like a nun without the bother of a black robe , and be kind , and read Bernard Shaw , and enormously improve a horde of grateful poor .
The supplementary reading in sociology led her to a book on village-improvement -- tree-planting , town pageants , girls ’ clubs .
It had pictures of greens and garden-walls in France , New England , Pennsylvania .
She had picked it up carelessly , with a slight yawn which she patted down with her finger-tips as delicately as a cat .
She dipped into the book , lounging on her window-seat , with her slim , lisle-stockinged legs crossed , and her knees up under her chin .
She stroked a satin pillow while she read .
About her was the clothy exuberance of a Blodgett College room : cretonne-covered window-seat , photographs of girls , a carbon print of the Coliseum , a chafing-dish , and a dozen pillows embroidered or beaded or pyrographed .
Shockingly out of place was a miniature of the Dancing Bacchante .
It was the only trace of Carol in the room .
She had inherited the rest from generations of girl students .
It was as a part of all this commonplaceness that she regarded the treatise on village-improvement .
But she suddenly stopped fidgeting .
She strode into the book .
She had fled half-way through it before the three o’clock bell called her to the class in English history .
She sighed , “ That ’s what I ’ll do after college !
I ’ll get my hands on one of these prairie towns and make it beautiful .
Be an inspiration .
I suppose I ’d better become a teacher then , but -- I wo n’t be that kind of a teacher .
I wo n’t drone .
Why should they have all the garden suburbs on Long Island ?
Nobody has done anything with the ugly towns here in the Northwest except hold revivals and build libraries to contain the Elsie books .
I ’ll make ‘ em put in a village green , and darling cottages , and a quaint Main Street ! ”
CHAPTER I In the days when the spinning-wheels hummed busily in the farmhouses -- and even great ladies , clothed in silk and thread-lace , had their toy spinning-wheels of polished oak -- there might be seen in districts far away among the lanes , or deep in the bosom of the hills , certain pallid undersized men , who , by the side of the brawny country-folk , looked like the remnants of a disinherited race .
The shepherd 's dog barked fiercely when one of these alien-looking men appeared on the upland , dark against the early winter sunset ; for what dog likes a figure bent under a heavy bag ?
-- and these pale men rarely stirred abroad without that mysterious burden .
The shepherd himself , though he had good reason to believe that the bag held nothing but flaxen thread , or else the long rolls of strong linen spun from that thread , was not quite sure that this trade of weaving , indispensable though it was , could be carried on entirely without the help of the Evil One .
In that far-off time superstition clung easily round every person or thing that was at all unwonted , or even intermittent and occasional merely , like the visits of the pedlar or the knife-grinder .
No one knew where wandering men had their homes or their origin ; and how was a man to be explained unless you at least knew somebody who knew his father and mother ?
To the peasants of old times , the world outside their own direct experience was a region of vagueness and mystery : to their untravelled thought a state of wandering was a conception as dim as the winter life of the swallows that came back with the spring ; and even a settler , if he came from distant parts , hardly ever ceased to be viewed with a remnant of distrust , which would have prevented any surprise if a long course of inoffensive conduct on his part had ended in the commission of a crime ; especially if he had any reputation for knowledge , or showed any skill in handicraft .
All cleverness , whether in the rapid use of that difficult instrument the tongue , or in some other art unfamiliar to villagers , was in itself suspicious : honest folk , born and bred in a visible manner , were mostly not overwise or clever -- at least , not beyond such a matter as knowing the signs of the weather ; and the process by which rapidity and dexterity of any kind were acquired was so wholly hidden , that they partook of the nature of conjuring .
In this way it came to pass that those scattered linen-weavers -- emigrants from the town into the country -- were to the last regarded as aliens by their rustic neighbours , and usually contracted the eccentric habits which belong to a state of loneliness .
In the early years of this century , such a linen-weaver , named Silas Marner , worked at his vocation in a stone cottage that stood among the nutty hedgerows near the village of Raveloe , and not far from the edge of a deserted stone-pit .
The questionable sound of Silas 's loom , so unlike the natural cheerful trotting of the winnowing-machine , or the simpler rhythm of the flail , had a half-fearful fascination for the Raveloe boys , who would often leave off their nutting or birds ' - nesting to peep in at the window of the stone cottage , counterbalancing a certain awe at the mysterious action of the loom , by a pleasant sense of scornful superiority , drawn from the mockery of its alternating noises , along with the bent , tread-mill attitude of the weaver .
But sometimes it happened that Marner , pausing to adjust an irregularity in his thread , became aware of the small scoundrels , and , though chary of his time , he liked their intrusion so ill that he would descend from his loom , and , opening the door , would fix on them a gaze that was always enough to make them take to their legs in terror .
For how was it possible to believe that those large brown protuberant eyes in Silas Marner 's pale face really saw nothing very distinctly that was not close to them , and not rather that their dreadful stare could dart cramp , or rickets , or a wry mouth at any boy who happened to be in the rear ?
They had , perhaps , heard their fathers and mothers hint that Silas Marner could cure folks ' rheumatism if he had a mind , and add , still more darkly , that if you could only speak the devil fair enough , he might save you the cost of the doctor .
Such strange lingering echoes of the old demon-worship might perhaps even now be caught by the diligent listener among the grey-haired peasantry ; for the rude mind with difficulty associates the ideas of power and benignity .
A shadowy conception of power that by much persuasion can be induced to refrain from inflicting harm , is the shape most easily taken by the sense of the Invisible in the minds of men who have always been pressed close by primitive wants , and to whom a life of hard toil has never been illuminated by any enthusiastic religious faith .
To them pain and mishap present a far wider range of possibilities than gladness and enjoyment : their imagination is almost barren of the images that feed desire and hope , but is all overgrown by recollections that are a perpetual pasture to fear .
" Is there anything you can fancy that you would like to eat ? "
I once said to an old labouring man , who was in his last illness , and who had refused all the food his wife had offered him .
" No , " he answered , " I 've never been used to nothing but common victual , and I ca n't eat that . "
Experience had bred no fancies in him that could raise the phantasm of appetite .
And Raveloe was a village where many of the old echoes lingered , undrowned by new voices .
Not that it was one of those barren parishes lying on the outskirts of civilization -- inhabited by meagre sheep and thinly-scattered shepherds : on the contrary , it lay in the rich central plain of what we are pleased to call Merry England , and held farms which , speaking from a spiritual point of view , paid highly-desirable tithes .
But it was nestled in a snug well-wooded hollow , quite an hour 's journey on horseback from any turnpike , where it was never reached by the vibrations of the coach-horn , or of public opinion .
It was an important-looking village , with a fine old church and large churchyard in the heart of it , and two or three large brick-and-stone homesteads , with well-walled orchards and ornamental weathercocks , standing close upon the road , and lifting more imposing fronts than the rectory , which peeped from among the trees on the other side of the churchyard : -- a village which showed at once the summits of its social life , and told the practised eye that there was no great park and manor-house in the vicinity , but that there were several chiefs in Raveloe who could farm badly quite at their ease , drawing enough money from their bad farming , in those war times , to live in a rollicking fashion , and keep a jolly Christmas , Whitsun , and Easter tide .
It was fifteen years since Silas Marner had first come to Raveloe ; he was then simply a pallid young man , with prominent short-sighted brown eyes , whose appearance would have had nothing strange for people of average culture and experience , but for the villagers near whom he had come to settle it had mysterious peculiarities which corresponded with the exceptional nature of his occupation , and his advent from an unknown region called " North ' ard " .
So had his way of life : -- he invited no comer to step across his door-sill , and he never strolled into the village to drink a pint at the Rainbow , or to gossip at the wheelwright 's : he sought no man or woman , save for the purposes of his calling , or in order to supply himself with necessaries ; and it was soon clear to the Raveloe lasses that he would never urge one of them to accept him against her will -- quite as if he had heard them declare that they would never marry a dead man come to life again .
This view of Marner 's personality was not without another ground than his pale face and unexampled eyes ; for Jem Rodney , the mole-catcher , averred that one evening as he was returning homeward , he saw Silas Marner leaning against a stile with a heavy bag on his back , instead of resting the bag on the stile as a man in his senses would have done ; and that , on coming up to him , he saw that Marner 's eyes were set like a dead man 's , and he spoke to him , and shook him , and his limbs were stiff , and his hands clutched the bag as if they 'd been made of iron ; but just as he had made up his mind that the weaver was dead , he came all right again , like , as you might say , in the winking of an eye , and said " Good-night " , and walked off .
All this Jem swore he had seen , more by token that it was the very day he had been mole-catching on Squire Cass 's land , down by the old saw-pit .
Some said Marner must have been in a " fit " , a word which seemed to explain things otherwise incredible ; but the argumentative Mr. Macey , clerk of the parish , shook his head , and asked if anybody was ever known to go off in a fit and not fall down .
A fit was a stroke , was n't it ?
and it was in the nature of a stroke to partly take away the use of a man 's limbs and throw him on the parish , if he 'd got no children to look to .
No , no ; it was no stroke that would let a man stand on his legs , like a horse between the shafts , and then walk off as soon as you can say " Gee ! "
But there might be such a thing as a man 's soul being loose from his body , and going out and in , like a bird out of its nest and back ; and that was how folks got over-wise , for they went to school in this shell-less state to those who could teach them more than their neighbours could learn with their five senses and the parson .
And where did Master Marner get his knowledge of herbs from -- and charms too , if he liked to give them away ?
Jem Rodney 's story was no more than what might have been expected by anybody who had seen how Marner had cured Sally Oates , and made her sleep like a baby , when her heart had been beating enough to burst her body , for two months and more , while she had been under the doctor 's care .
He might cure more folks if he would ; but he was worth speaking fair , if it was only to keep him from doing you a mischief .
CHAPTER I Chiswick Mall While the present century was in its teens , and on one sunshiny morning in June , there drove up to the great iron gate of Miss Pinkerton 's academy for young ladies , on Chiswick Mall , a large family coach , with two fat horses in blazing harness , driven by a fat coachman in a three-cornered hat and wig , at the rate of four miles an hour .
A black servant , who reposed on the box beside the fat coachman , uncurled his bandy legs as soon as the equipage drew up opposite Miss Pinkerton 's shining brass plate , and as he pulled the bell at least a score of young heads were seen peering out of the narrow windows of the stately old brick house .
Nay , the acute observer might have recognized the little red nose of good-natured Miss Jemima Pinkerton herself , rising over some geranium pots in the window of that lady 's own drawing-room .
" It is Mrs. Sedley 's coach , sister , " said Miss Jemima .
" Sambo , the black servant , has just rung the bell ; and the coachman has a new red waistcoat . "
" Have you completed all the necessary preparations incident to Miss Sedley 's departure , Miss Jemima ? "
asked Miss Pinkerton herself , that majestic lady ; the Semiramis of Hammersmith , the friend of Doctor Johnson , the correspondent of Mrs. Chapone herself .
" The girls were up at four this morning , packing her trunks , sister , " replied Miss Jemima ; " we have made her a bow-pot . "
" Say a bouquet , sister Jemima , 't is more genteel . "
" Well , a booky as big almost as a haystack ; I have put up two bottles of the gillyflower water for Mrs. Sedley , and the receipt for making it , in Amelia 's box . "
" And I trust , Miss Jemima , you have made a copy of Miss Sedley 's account .
This is it , is it ?
Very good -- ninety-three pounds , four shillings .
Be kind enough to address it to John Sedley , Esquire , and to seal this billet which I have written to his lady . "
In Miss Jemima 's eyes an autograph letter of her sister , Miss Pinkerton , was an object of as deep veneration as would have been a letter from a sovereign .
Only when her pupils quitted the establishment , or when they were about to be married , and once , when poor Miss Birch died of the scarlet fever , was Miss Pinkerton known to write personally to the parents of her pupils ; and it was Jemima 's opinion that if anything could console Mrs. Birch for her daughter 's loss , it would be that pious and eloquent composition in which Miss Pinkerton announced the event .
In the present instance Miss Pinkerton 's " billet " was to the following effect : -- The Mall , Chiswick , June 15 , 18 MADAM , -- After her six years ' residence at the Mall , I have the honour and happiness of presenting Miss Amelia Sedley to her parents , as a young lady not unworthy to occupy a fitting position in their polished and refined circle .
Those virtues which characterize the young English gentlewoman , those accomplishments which become her birth and station , will not be found wanting in the amiable Miss Sedley , whose INDUSTRY and OBEDIENCE have endeared her to her instructors , and whose delightful sweetness of temper has charmed her AGED and her YOUTHFUL companions .
In music , in dancing , in orthography , in every variety of embroidery and needlework , she will be found to have realized her friends ' fondest wishes .
In geography there is still much to be desired ; and a careful and undeviating use of the backboard , for four hours daily during the next three years , is recommended as necessary to the acquirement of that dignified DEPORTMENT AND CARRIAGE , so requisite for every young lady of FASHION .
In the principles of religion and morality , Miss Sedley will be found worthy of an establishment which has been honoured by the presence of THE GREAT LEXICOGRAPHER , and the patronage of the admirable Mrs. Chapone .
In leaving the Mall , Miss Amelia carries with her the hearts of her companions , and the affectionate regards of her mistress , who has the honour to subscribe herself , Madam , Your most obliged humble servant , BARBARA PINKERTON P.S. -- Miss Sharp accompanies Miss Sedley .
It is particularly requested that Miss Sharp 's stay in Russell Square may not exceed ten days .
The family of distinction with whom she is engaged , desire to avail themselves of her services as soon as possible .
This letter completed , Miss Pinkerton proceeded to write her own name , and Miss Sedley 's , in the fly-leaf of a Johnson 's Dictionary -- the interesting work which she invariably presented to her scholars , on their departure from the Mall .
On the cover was inserted a copy of " Lines addressed to a young lady on quitting Miss Pinkerton 's school , at the Mall ; by the late revered Doctor Samuel Johnson . "
In fact , the Lexicographer 's name was always on the lips of this majestic woman , and a visit he had paid to her was the cause of her reputation and her fortune .
Being commanded by her elder sister to get " the Dictionary " from the cupboard , Miss Jemima had extracted two copies of the book from the receptacle in question .
When Miss Pinkerton had finished the inscription in the first , Jemima , with rather a dubious and timid air , handed her the second .
" For whom is this , Miss Jemima ? "
said Miss Pinkerton , with awful coldness .
" For Becky Sharp , " answered Jemima , trembling very much , and blushing over her withered face and neck , as she turned her back on her sister .
" For Becky Sharp : she 's going too . "
" MISS JEMIMA ! "
exclaimed Miss Pinkerton , in the largest capitals .
" Are you in your senses ?
Replace the Dixonary in the closet , and never venture to take such a liberty in future . "
" Well , sister , it 's only two-and-ninepence , and poor Becky will be miserable if she do n't get one . "
" Send Miss Sedley instantly to me , " said Miss Pinkerton .
And so venturing not to say another word , poor Jemima trotted off , exceedingly flurried and nervous .
Miss Sedley 's papa was a merchant in London , and a man of some wealth ; whereas Miss Sharp was an articled pupil , for whom Miss Pinkerton had done , as she thought , quite enough , without conferring upon her at parting the high honour of the Dixonary .
Although schoolmistresses ' letters are to be trusted no more nor less than churchyard epitaphs ; yet , as it sometimes happens that a person departs this life who is really deserving of all the praises the stone cutter carves over his bones ; who IS a good Christian , a good parent , child , wife , or husband ; who actually DOES leave a disconsolate family to mourn his loss ; so in academies of the male and female sex it occurs every now and then that the pupil is fully worthy of the praises bestowed by the disinterested instructor .
Now , Miss Amelia Sedley was a young lady of this singular species ; and deserved not only all that Miss Pinkerton said in her praise , but had many charming qualities which that pompous old Minerva of a woman could not see , from the differences of rank and age between her pupil and herself .
For she could not only sing like a lark , or a Mrs. Billington , and dance like Hillisberg or Parisot ; and embroider beautifully ; and spell as well as a Dixonary itself ; but she had such a kindly , smiling , tender , gentle , generous heart of her own , as won the love of everybody who came near her , from Minerva herself down to the poor girl in the scullery , and the one-eyed tart-woman 's daughter , who was permitted to vend her wares once a week to the young ladies in the Mall .
She had twelve intimate and bosom friends out of the twenty-four young ladies .
Even envious Miss Briggs never spoke ill of her ; high and mighty Miss Saltire ( Lord Dexter 's granddaughter ) allowed that her figure was genteel ; and as for Miss Swartz , the rich woolly-haired mulatto from St. Kitt 's , on the day Amelia went away , she was in such a passion of tears that they were obliged to send for Dr. Floss , and half tipsify her with salvolatile .
Miss Pinkerton 's attachment was , as may be supposed from the high position and eminent virtues of that lady , calm and dignified ; but Miss Jemima had already whimpered several times at the idea of Amelia 's departure ; and , but for fear of her sister , would have gone off in downright hysterics , like the heiress ( who paid double ) of St. Kitt 's .
Such luxury of grief , however , is only allowed to parlour-boarders .
Honest Jemima had all the bills , and the washing , and the mending , and the puddings , and the plate and crockery , and the servants to superintend .
But why speak about her ?
It is probable that we shall not hear of her again from this moment to the end of time , and that when the great filigree iron gates are once closed on her , she and her awful sister will never issue therefrom into this little world of history .
But as we are to see a great deal of Amelia , there is no harm in saying , at the outset of our acquaintance , that she was a dear little creature ; and a great mercy it is , both in life and in novels , which ( and the latter especially ) abound in villains of the most sombre sort , that we are to have for a constant companion so guileless and good-natured a person .
As she is not a heroine , there is no need to describe her person ; indeed I am afraid that her nose was rather short than otherwise , and her cheeks a great deal too round and red for a heroine ; but her face blushed with rosy health , and her lips with the freshest of smiles , and she had a pair of eyes which sparkled with the brightest and honestest good-humour , except indeed when they filled with tears , and that was a great deal too often ; for the silly thing would cry over a dead canary-bird ; or over a mouse , that the cat haply had seized upon ; or over the end of a novel , were it ever so stupid ; and as for saying an unkind word to her , were any persons hard-hearted enough to do so -- why , so much the worse for them .
Even Miss Pinkerton , that austere and godlike woman , ceased scolding her after the first time , and though she no more comprehended sensibility than she did Algebra , gave all masters and teachers particular orders to treat Miss Sedley with the utmost gentleness , as harsh treatment was injurious to her .
LETTER I LADY HOWARD TO THE REV. MR. VILLARS Howard Grove , Kent .
CAN any thing , my good Sir , be more painful to a friendly mind , than a necessity of communicating disagreeable intelligence ?
Indeed it is sometimes difficult to determine , whether the relator or the receiver of evil tidings is most to be pitied .
I have just had a letter from Madame Duval ; she is totally at a loss in what manner to behave ; she seems desirous to repair the wrongs she has done , yet wishes the world to believe her blameless .
She would fain cast upon another the odium of those misfortunes for which she alone is answerable .
Her letter is violent , sometimes abusive , and that of you !
- you , to whom she is under obligations which are greater even than her faults , but to whose advice she wickedly imputes all the sufferings of her much injured daughter , the late Lady Belmont .
The chief purport of her writing I will acquaint you with ; the letter itself is not worthy your notice .
She tells me that she has , for many years past , been in continual expectation of making a journey to England , which prevented her writing for information concerning this melancholy subject , by giving her hopes of making personal inquiries ; but family occurrences have still detained her in France , which country she now sees no prospect of quitting .
She has , therefore , lately used her utmost endeavors to obtain a faithful account of whatever related to her ill-advised daughter ; the result of which giving her some reason to apprehend , that , upon her death-bed , she bequeathed an infant orphan to the world , she most graciously says , that if you , with whom she understands the child is placed , will procure authentic proofs of its relationship to her , you may sent it to Paris , where she will properly provide for it .
This woman is , undoubtedly , at length , self-convicted of her most unnatural behaviour ; it is evident , from her writing , that she is still as vulgar and illiterate as when her first husband , Mr. Evelyn , had the weakness to marry her ; nor does she at all apologize for addressing herself to me , though I was only once in her company .
Her letter has excited in my daughter Mirvan , a strong desire to be informed of the motives which induced Madame Duval to abandon the unfortunate Lady Belmont , at a time when a mother 's protection was peculiarly necessary for her peace and her reputation .
Notwithstanding I was personally acquainted with all the parties concerned in that affair , the subject always appeared of too delicate a nature to be spoken of with the principals ; I can not , therefore , satisfy Mrs. Mirvan otherwise than by applying to you .
By saying that you may send the child , Madame Duval aims at conferring , where she most owes obligation .
I pretend not to give you advice ; you , to whose generous protection this helpless orphan is indebted for every thing , are the best and only judge of what she ought to do ; but I am much concerned at the trouble and uneasiness which this unworthy woman may occasion you .
My daughter and my grandchild join with me in desiring to be most kindly remembered to the amiable girl ; and they bid me remind you , that the annual visit to Howard Grove , which we were formerly promised , has been discontinued for more than four years .
I am , dear Sir , with great regard , Your most obedient friend and servant , M. HOWARD .
LETTER II MR. VILLARS TO LADY HOWARD Berry Hill , Dorsetshire .
YOUR Ladyship did but too well foresee the perplexity and uneasiness of which Madame Duval 's letter has been productive .
However , I ought rather to be thankful that I have so many years remained unmolested , than repine at my present embarrassment ; since it proves , at least , that this wretched woman is at length awakened to remorse .
In regard to my answer , I must humbly request your Ladyship to write to this effect : " That I would not , upon any account , intentionally offend Madame Duval ; but that I have weighty , nay unanswerable reasons for detaining her grand-daughter at present in England ; the principal of which is , that it was the earnest desire of one to whose will she owes implicit duty .
Madame Duval may be assured , that she meets with the utmost attention and tenderness ; that her education , however short of my wishes , almost exceeds my abilities ; and I flatter myself , when the time arrives that she shall pay her duty to her grand-mother , Madame Duval will find no reason to be dissatisfied with what has been done for her . "
Your Ladyship will not , I am sure , be surprised at this answer .
Madame Duval is by no means a proper companion or guardian for a young woman : she is at once uneducated and unprincipled ; ungentle in temper , and unamiable in her manners .
I have long known that she has persuaded herself to harbour an aversion for me-Unhappy woman !
I can only regard her as an object of pity !
I dare not hesitate at a request from Mrs. Mirvan ; yet , in complying with it , I shall , for her own sake , be as concise as I possibly can ; since the cruel transactions which preceded the birth of my ward can afford no entertainment to a mind so humane as her 's .
Your Ladyship may probably have heard , that I had the honour to accompany Mr. Evelyn , the grandfather of my young charge , when upon his travels , in the capacity of a tutor .
His unhappy marriage , immediately upon his return to England , with Madame Duval , then a waiting-girl at a tavern , contrary to the advice and entreaties of all his friends , among whom I was myself the most urgent , induced him to abandon his native land , and fix his abode in France .
Thither he was followed by shame and repentance ; feelings which his heart was not framed to support ; for , notwithstanding he had been too weak to resist the allurements of beauty , which nature , though a niggard to her of every other boon , had with a lavish hand bestowed on his wife ; yet he was a young man of excellent character , and , till thus unaccountably infatuated , of unblemished conduct .
He survived this ill-judged marriage but two years .
Upon his death-bed , with an unsteady hand , he wrote me the following note : " My friend , forget your resentment , in favour of your humanity ; - a father , trembling for the welfare of his child , bequeaths her to your care .
O Villars !
hear !
pity !
And relieve me ! "
Had my circumstances permitted me , I should have answered these words by an immediate journey to Paris ; but I was obliged to act by the agency of a friend , who was upon the spot , and present at the opening of the will .
Mr. Evelyn left to me a legacy of a thousand pounds , and the sole guardianship of his daughter 's person till her eighteenth year ; conjuring me , in the most affecting terms , to take the charge of her education till she was able to act with propriety for herself ; but , in regard to fortune , he left her wholly dependent on her mother , to whose tenderness he earnestly recommended her .
Thus , though he would not , to a woman low-bred and illiberal as Mrs. Evelyn , trust the conduct and morals of his daughter , he nevertheless thought proper to secure to her the respect and duty to which , from her own child , were certainly her due ; but unhappily , it never occurred to him that the mother , on her part , could fail in affection or justice .
Miss Evelyn , Madam , from the second to the eighteenth year of her life , was brought up under my care , and , except when at school under my roof .
I need not speak to your Ladyship of the virtues of that excellent young creature .
She loved me as her father ; nor was Mrs. Villars less valued by her ; while to me she became so dear , that her loss was little less afflicting than that which I have since sustained of Mrs. Villars herself .
At that period of her life we parted ; her mother , then married to Monsieur Duval , sent for her to Paris .
How often have I since regretted that I did not accompany her thither !
Protected and supported by me , the misery and disgrace which awaited her might perhaps have been avoided .
But , to be brief-Madame Duval , at the instigation of her husband , earnestly , or rather tyrannically , endeavoured to effect a union between Miss Evelyn and one of his nephews .
And , when she found her power inadequate to her attempt , enraged at her non-compliance , she treated her with the grossest unkindness , and threatened her with poverty and ruin .
Miss Evelyn , to whom wrath and violence had hitherto been strangers , soon grew weary of such usage ; and rashly , and without a witness , consented to a private marriage with Sir John Belmont , a very profligate young man , who had but too successfully found means to insinuate himself into her favour .
He promised to conduct her to England-he did.-O , Madam , you know the rest !
- Disappointed of the fortune he expected , by the inexorable rancour of the Duvals , he infamously burnt the certificate of their marriage , and denied that they had ever been united .
She flew to me for protection .
With what mixed transports of joy and anguish did I again see her !
By my advice , she endeavoured to procure proofs of her marriage-but in vain ; her credulity had been no match for his art .
Every body believed her innocent , from the guiltless tenor of her unspotted youth , and from the known libertinism of her barbarous betrayer .
Yet her sufferings were too acute for her slender frame ; and the same moment that gave birth to her infant , put an end at once to the sorrows and the life of its mother .
The rage of Madame Duval at her elopement , abated not while this injured victim of cruelty yet drew breath .
She probably intended , in time , to have pardoned her ; but time was not allowed .
When she was informed of her death , I have been told , that the agonies of grief and remorse , with which she was seized , occasioned her a severe fit of illness .
But , from the time of her recovery to the date of her letter to your Ladyship , I had never heard that she manifested any desire to be made acquainted with the circumstances which attended the death of Lady Belmont , and the birth of her helpless child .
CHAPTER I PARIS : SEPTEMBER , 1792 A surging , seething , murmuring crowd of beings that are human only in name , for to the eye and ear they seem naught but savage creatures , animated by vile passions and by the lust of vengeance and of hate .
The hour , some little time before sunset , and the place , the West Barricade , at the very spot where , a decade later , a proud tyrant raised an undying monument to the nation 's glory and his own vanity .
During the greater part of the day the guillotine had been kept busy at its ghastly work : all that France had boasted of in the past centuries , of ancient names , and blue blood , had paid toll to her desire for liberty and for fraternity .
The carnage had only ceased at this late hour of the day because there were other more interesting sights for the people to witness , a little while before the final closing of the barricades for the night .
And so the crowd rushed away from the Place de la Greve and made for the various barricades in order to watch this interesting and amusing sight .
It was to be seen every day , for those aristos were such fools !
They were traitors to the people of course , all of them , men , women , and children , who happened to be descendants of the great men who since the Crusades had made the glory of France : her old NOBLESSE .
Their ancestors had oppressed the people , had crushed them under the scarlet heels of their dainty buckled shoes , and now the people had become the rulers of France and crushed their former masters -- not beneath their heel , for they went shoeless mostly in these days -- but a more effectual weight , the knife of the guillotine .
And daily , hourly , the hideous instrument of torture claimed its many victims -- old men , young women , tiny children until the day when it would finally demand the head of a King and of a beautiful young Queen .
But this was as it should be : were not the people now the rulers of France ?
Every aristocrat was a traitor , as his ancestors had been before him : for two hundred years now the people had sweated , and toiled , and starved , to keep a lustful court in lavish extravagance ; now the descendants of those who had helped to make those courts brilliant had to hide for their lives -- to fly , if they wished to avoid the tardy vengeance of the people .
And they did try to hide , and tried to fly : that was just the fun of the whole thing .
Every afternoon before the gates closed and the market carts went out in procession by the various barricades , some fool of an aristo endeavoured to evade the clutches of the Committee of Public Safety .
In various disguises , under various pretexts , they tried to slip through the barriers , which were so well guarded by citizen soldiers of the Republic .
Men in women 's clothes , women in male attire , children disguised in beggars ' rags : there were some of all sorts : CI-DEVANT counts , marquises , even dukes , who wanted to fly from France , reach England or some other equally accursed country , and there try to rouse foreign feelings against the glorious Revolution , or to raise an army in order to liberate the wretched prisoners in the Temple , who had once called themselves sovereigns of France .
But they were nearly always caught at the barricades , Sergeant Bibot especially at the West Gate had a wonderful nose for scenting an aristo in the most perfect disguise .
Then , of course , the fun began .
Bibot would look at his prey as a cat looks upon the mouse , play with him , sometimes for quite a quarter of an hour , pretend to be hoodwinked by the disguise , by the wigs and other bits of theatrical make-up which hid the identity of a CI-DEVANT noble marquise or count .
Oh !
Bibot had a keen sense of humour , and it was well worth hanging round that West Barricade , in order to see him catch an aristo in the very act of trying to flee from the vengeance of the people .
Sometimes Bibot would let his prey actually out by the gates , allowing him to think for the space of two minutes at least that he really had escaped out of Paris , and might even manage to reach the coast of England in safety , but Bibot would let the unfortunate wretch walk about ten metres towards the open country , then he would send two men after him and bring him back , stripped of his disguise .
Oh !
that was extremely funny , for as often as not the fugitive would prove to be a woman , some proud marchioness , who looked terribly comical when she found herself in Bibot 's clutches after all , and knew that a summary trial would await her the next day and after that , the fond embrace of Madame la Guillotine .
No wonder that on this fine afternoon in September the crowd round Bibot 's gate was eager and excited .
The lust of blood grows with its satisfaction , there is no satiety : the crowd had seen a hundred noble heads fall beneath the guillotine to-day , it wanted to make sure that it would see another hundred fall on the morrow .
Bibot was sitting on an overturned and empty cask close by the gate of the barricade ; a small detachment of citoyen soldiers was under his command .
The work had been very hot lately .
Those cursed aristos were becoming terrified and tried their hardest to slip out of Paris : men , women and children , whose ancestors , even in remote ages , had served those traitorous Bourbons , were all traitors themselves and right food for the guillotine .
Every day Bibot had had the satisfaction of unmasking some fugitive royalists and sending them back to be tried by the Committee of Public Safety , presided over by that good patriot , Citoyen Foucquier-Tinville .
Robespierre and Danton both had commended Bibot for his zeal and Bibot was proud of the fact that he on his own initiative had sent at least fifty aristos to the guillotine .
But to-day all the sergeants in command at the various barricades had had special orders .
Recently a very great number of aristos had succeeded in escaping out of France and in reaching England safely .
There were curious rumours about these escapes ; they had become very frequent and singularly daring ; the people 's minds were becoming strangely excited about it all .
Sergeant Grospierre had been sent to the guillotine for allowing a whole family of aristos to slip out of the North Gate under his very nose .
It was asserted that these escapes were organised by a band of Englishmen , whose daring seemed to be unparalleled , and who , from sheer desire to meddle in what did not concern them , spent their spare time in snatching away lawful victims destined for Madame la Guillotine .
These rumours soon grew in extravagance ; there was no doubt that this band of meddlesome Englishmen did exist ; moreover , they seemed to be under the leadership of a man whose pluck and audacity were almost fabulous .
Strange stories were afloat of how he and those aristos whom he rescued became suddenly invisible as they reached the barricades and escaped out of the gates by sheer supernatural agency .
No one had seen these mysterious Englishmen ; as for their leader , he was never spoken of , save with a superstitious shudder .
Citoyen Foucquier-Tinville would in the course of the day receive a scrap of paper from some mysterious source ; sometimes he would find it in the pocket of his coat , at others it would be handed to him by someone in the crowd , whilst he was on his way to the sitting of the Committee of Public Safety .
The paper always contained a brief notice that the band of meddlesome Englishmen were at work , and it was always signed with a device drawn in red -- a little star-shaped flower , which we in England call the Scarlet Pimpernel .
Within a few hours of the receipt of this impudent notice , the citoyens of the Committee of Public Safety would hear that so many royalists and aristocrats had succeeded in reaching the coast , and were on their way to England and safety .
The guards at the gates had been doubled , the sergeants in command had been threatened with death , whilst liberal rewards were offered for the capture of these daring and impudent Englishmen .
There was a sum of five thousand francs promised to the man who laid hands on the mysterious and elusive Scarlet Pimpernel .
Everyone felt that Bibot would be that man , and Bibot allowed that belief to take firm root in everybody 's mind ; and so , day after day , people came to watch him at the West Gate , so as to be present when he laid hands on any fugitive aristo who perhaps might be accompanied by that mysterious Englishman .
“ Bah ! ” he said to his trusted corporal , “ Citoyen Grospierre was a fool !
Had it been me now , at that North Gate last week . . . ” Citoyen Bibot spat on the ground to express his contempt for his comrade 's stupidity .
“ How did it happen , citoyen ? ” asked the corporal .
“ Grospierre was at the gate , keeping good watch , ” began Bibot , pompously , as the crowd closed in round him , listening eagerly to his narrative .
“ We 've all heard of this meddlesome Englishman , this accursed Scarlet Pimpernel .
He wo n't get through MY gate , MORBLEU !
unless he be the devil himself .
But Grospierre was a fool .
The market carts were going through the gates ; there was one laden with casks , and driven by an old man , with a boy beside him .
Grospierre was a bit drunk , but he thought himself very clever ; he looked into the casks -- most of them , at least -- and saw they were empty , and let the cart go through . ”
A murmur of wrath and contempt went round the group of ill-clad wretches , who crowded round Citoyen Bibot .
“ Half an hour later , ” continued the sergeant , “ up comes a captain of the guard with a squad of some dozen soldiers with him .
' Has a cart gone through ? '
he asks of Grospierre , breathlessly .
' Yes , ' says Grospierre , ' not half an hour ago . '
' And you have let them escape , ' shouts the captain furiously .
' You 'll go to the guillotine for this , citoyen sergeant !
that cart held concealed the CI-DEVANT Duc de Chalis and all his family ! '
' What ! '
thunders Grospierre , aghast .
' Aye !
and the driver was none other than that cursed Englishman , the Scarlet Pimpernel . ' ”
A howl of execration greeted this tale .
Citoyen Grospierre had paid for his blunder on the guillotine , but what a fool !
oh !
what a fool !
CHAPTER I ON THE ARIZONA HILLS I am a very old man ; how old I do not know .
Possibly I am a hundred , possibly more ; but I can not tell because I have never aged as other men , nor do I remember any childhood .
So far as I can recollect I have always been a man , a man of about thirty .
I appear today as I did forty years and more ago , and yet I feel that I can not go on living forever ; that some day I shall die the real death from which there is no resurrection .
I do not know why I should fear death , I who have died twice and am still alive ; but yet I have the same horror of it as you who have never died , and it is because of this terror of death , I believe , that I am so convinced of my mortality .
And because of this conviction I have determined to write down the story of the interesting periods of my life and of my death .
I can not explain the phenomena ; I can only set down here in the words of an ordinary soldier of fortune a chronicle of the strange events that befell me during the ten years that my dead body lay undiscovered in an Arizona cave .
I have never told this story , nor shall mortal man see this manuscript until after I have passed over for eternity .
I know that the average human mind will not believe what it can not grasp , and so I do not purpose being pilloried by the public , the pulpit , and the press , and held up as a colossal liar when I am but telling the simple truths which some day science will substantiate .
Possibly the suggestions which I gained upon Mars , and the knowledge which I can set down in this chronicle , will aid in an earlier understanding of the mysteries of our sister planet ; mysteries to you , but no longer mysteries to me .
My name is John Carter ; I am better known as Captain Jack Carter of Virginia .
At the close of the Civil War I found myself possessed of several hundred thousand dollars ( Confederate ) and a captain 's commission in the cavalry arm of an army which no longer existed ; the servant of a state which had vanished with the hopes of the South .
Masterless , penniless , and with my only means of livelihood , fighting , gone , I determined to work my way to the southwest and attempt to retrieve my fallen fortunes in a search for gold .
I spent nearly a year prospecting in company with another Confederate officer , Captain James K. Powell of Richmond .
We were extremely fortunate , for late in the winter of 1865 , after many hardships and privations , we located the most remarkable gold-bearing quartz vein that our wildest dreams had ever pictured .
Powell , who was a mining engineer by education , stated that we had uncovered over a million dollars worth of ore in a trifle over three months .
As our equipment was crude in the extreme we decided that one of us must return to civilization , purchase the necessary machinery and return with a sufficient force of men properly to work the mine .
As Powell was familiar with the country , as well as with the mechanical requirements of mining we determined that it would be best for him to make the trip .
It was agreed that I was to hold down our claim against the remote possibility of its being jumped by some wandering prospector .
On March 3 , 1866 , Powell and I packed his provisions on two of our burros , and bidding me good-bye he mounted his horse , and started down the mountainside toward the valley , across which led the first stage of his journey .
The morning of Powell 's departure was , like nearly all Arizona mornings , clear and beautiful ; I could see him and his little pack animals picking their way down the mountainside toward the valley , and all during the morning I would catch occasional glimpses of them as they topped a hog back or came out upon a level plateau .
My last sight of Powell was about three in the afternoon as he entered the shadows of the range on the opposite side of the valley .
Some half hour later I happened to glance casually across the valley and was much surprised to note three little dots in about the same place I had last seen my friend and his two pack animals .
I am not given to needless worrying , but the more I tried to convince myself that all was well with Powell , and that the dots I had seen on his trail were antelope or wild horses , the less I was able to assure myself .
Since we had entered the territory we had not seen a hostile Indian , and we had , therefore , become careless in the extreme , and were wont to ridicule the stories we had heard of the great numbers of these vicious marauders that were supposed to haunt the trails , taking their toll in lives and torture of every white party which fell into their merciless clutches .
Powell , I knew , was well armed and , further , an experienced Indian fighter ; but I too had lived and fought for years among the Sioux in the North , and I knew that his chances were small against a party of cunning trailing Apaches .
Finally I could endure the suspense no longer , and , arming myself with my two Colt revolvers and a carbine , I strapped two belts of cartridges about me and catching my saddle horse , started down the trail taken by Powell in the morning .
As soon as I reached comparatively level ground I urged my mount into a canter and continued this , where the going permitted , until , close upon dusk , I discovered the point where other tracks joined those of Powell .
They were the tracks of unshod ponies , three of them , and the ponies had been galloping .
I followed rapidly until , darkness shutting down , I was forced to await the rising of the moon , and given an opportunity to speculate on the question of the wisdom of my chase .
Possibly I had conjured up impossible dangers , like some nervous old housewife , and when I should catch up with Powell would get a good laugh for my pains .
However , I am not prone to sensitiveness , and the following of a sense of duty , wherever it may lead , has always been a kind of fetich with me throughout my life ; which may account for the honors bestowed upon me by three republics and the decorations and friendships of an old and powerful emperor and several lesser kings , in whose service my sword has been red many a time .
About nine o'clock the moon was sufficiently bright for me to proceed on my way and I had no difficulty in following the trail at a fast walk , and in some places at a brisk trot until , about midnight , I reached the water hole where Powell had expected to camp .
I came upon the spot unexpectedly , finding it entirely deserted , with no signs of having been recently occupied as a camp .
I was interested to note that the tracks of the pursuing horsemen , for such I was now convinced they must be , continued after Powell with only a brief stop at the hole for water ; and always at the same rate of speed as his .
I was positive now that the trailers were Apaches and that they wished to capture Powell alive for the fiendish pleasure of the torture , so I urged my horse onward at a most dangerous pace , hoping against hope that I would catch up with the red rascals before they attacked him .
Further speculation was suddenly cut short by the faint report of two shots far ahead of me .
I knew that Powell would need me now if ever , and I instantly urged my horse to his topmost speed up the narrow and difficult mountain trail .
I had forged ahead for perhaps a mile or more without hearing further sounds , when the trail suddenly debouched onto a small , open plateau near the summit of the pass .
I had passed through a narrow , overhanging gorge just before entering suddenly upon this table land , and the sight which met my eyes filled me with consternation and dismay .
The little stretch of level land was white with Indian tepees , and there were probably half a thousand red warriors clustered around some object near the center of the camp .
Their attention was so wholly riveted to this point of interest that they did not notice me , and I easily could have turned back into the dark recesses of the gorge and made my escape with perfect safety .
The fact , however , that this thought did not occur to me until the following day removes any possible right to a claim to heroism to which the narration of this episode might possibly otherwise entitle me .
I do not believe that I am made of the stuff which constitutes heroes , because , in all of the hundreds of instances that my voluntary acts have placed me face to face with death , I can not recall a single one where any alternative step to that I took occurred to me until many hours later .
My mind is evidently so constituted that I am subconsciously forced into the path of duty without recourse to tiresome mental processes .
However that may be , I have never regretted that cowardice is not optional with me .
In this instance I was , of course , positive that Powell was the center of attraction , but whether I thought or acted first I do not know , but within an instant from the moment the scene broke upon my view I had whipped out my revolvers and was charging down upon the entire army of warriors , shooting rapidly , and whooping at the top of my lungs .
Singlehanded , I could not have pursued better tactics , for the red men , convinced by sudden surprise that not less than a regiment of regulars was upon them , turned and fled in every direction for their bows , arrows , and rifles .
The view which their hurried routing disclosed filled me with apprehension and with rage .
Under the clear rays of the Arizona moon lay Powell , his body fairly bristling with the hostile arrows of the braves .
That he was already dead I could not but be convinced , and yet I would have saved his body from mutilation at the hands of the Apaches as quickly as I would have saved the man himself from death .
Riding close to him I reached down from the saddle , and grasping his cartridge belt drew him up across the withers of my mount .
A backward glance convinced me that to return by the way I had come would be more hazardous than to continue across the plateau , so , putting spurs to my poor beast , I made a dash for the opening to the pass which I could distinguish on the far side of the table land .
BOOK I. CONTAINING AS MUCH OF THE BIRTH OF THE FOUNDLING AS IS NECESSARY OR PROPER TO ACQUAINT THE READER WITH IN THE BEGINNING OF THIS HISTORY .
Chapter i .
The introduction to the work , or bill of fare to the feast .
An author ought to consider himself , not as a gentleman who gives a private or eleemosynary treat , but rather as one who keeps a public ordinary , at which all persons are welcome for their money .
In the former case , it is well known that the entertainer provides what fare he pleases ; and though this should be very indifferent , and utterly disagreeable to the taste of his company , they must not find any fault ; nay , on the contrary , good breeding forces them outwardly to approve and to commend whatever is set before them .
Now the contrary of this happens to the master of an ordinary .
Men who pay for what they eat will insist on gratifying their palates , however nice and whimsical these may prove ; and if everything is not agreeable to their taste , will challenge a right to censure , to abuse , and to d -- n their dinner without controul .
To prevent , therefore , giving offence to their customers by any such disappointment , it hath been usual with the honest and well-meaning host to provide a bill of fare which all persons may peruse at their first entrance into the house ; and having thence acquainted themselves with the entertainment which they may expect , may either stay and regale with what is provided for them , or may depart to some other ordinary better accommodated to their taste .
As we do not disdain to borrow wit or wisdom from any man who is capable of lending us either , we have condescended to take a hint from these honest victuallers , and shall prefix not only a general bill of fare to our whole entertainment , but shall likewise give the reader particular bills to every course which is to be served up in this and the ensuing volumes .
The provision , then , which we have here made is no other than _ Human Nature _ .
Nor do I fear that my sensible reader , though most luxurious in his taste , will start , cavil , or be offended , because I have named but one article .
The tortoise -- as the alderman of Bristol , well learned in eating , knows by much experience -- besides the delicious calipash and calipee , contains many different kinds of food ; nor can the learned reader be ignorant , that in human nature , though here collected under one general name , is such prodigious variety , that a cook will have sooner gone through all the several species of animal and vegetable food in the world , than an author will be able to exhaust so extensive a subject .
An objection may perhaps be apprehended from the more delicate , that this dish is too common and vulgar ; for what else is the subject of all the romances , novels , plays , and poems , with which the stalls abound ?
Many exquisite viands might be rejected by the epicure , if it was a sufficient cause for his contemning of them as common and vulgar , that something was to be found in the most paltry alleys under the same name .
In reality , true nature is as difficult to be met with in authors , as the Bayonne ham , or Bologna sausage , is to be found in the shops .
But the whole , to continue the same metaphor , consists in the cookery of the author ; for , as Mr Pope tells us -- “ True wit is nature to advantage drest ; What oft was thought , but ne'er so well exprest . ”
The same animal which hath the honour to have some part of his flesh eaten at the table of a duke , may perhaps be degraded in another part , and some of his limbs gibbeted , as it were , in the vilest stall in town .
Where , then , lies the difference between the food of the nobleman and the porter , if both are at dinner on the same ox or calf , but in the seasoning , the dressing , the garnishing , and the setting forth ?
Hence the one provokes and incites the most languid appetite , and the other turns and palls that which is the sharpest and keenest .
In like manner , the excellence of the mental entertainment consists less in the subject than in the author 's skill in well dressing it up .
How pleased , therefore , will the reader be to find that we have , in the following work , adhered closely to one of the highest principles of the best cook which the present age , or perhaps that of Heliogabalus , hath produced .
This great man , as is well known to all lovers of polite eating , begins at first by setting plain things before his hungry guests , rising afterwards by degrees as their stomachs may be supposed to decrease , to the very quintessence of sauce and spices .
In like manner , we shall represent human nature at first to the keen appetite of our reader , in that more plain and simple manner in which it is found in the country , and shall hereafter hash and ragoo it with all the high French and Italian seasoning of affectation and vice which courts and cities afford .
By these means , we doubt not but our reader may be rendered desirous to read on for ever , as the great person just above-mentioned is supposed to have made some persons eat .
Having premised thus much , we will now detain those who like our bill of fare no longer from their diet , and shall proceed directly to serve up the first course of our history for their entertainment .
Chapter ii .
A short description of squire Allworthy , and a fuller account of Miss Bridget Allworthy , his sister .
In that part of the western division of this kingdom which is commonly called Somersetshire , there lately lived , and perhaps lives still , a gentleman whose name was Allworthy , and who might well be called the favourite of both nature and fortune ; for both of these seem to have contended which should bless and enrich him most .
In this contention , nature may seem to some to have come off victorious , as she bestowed on him many gifts , while fortune had only one gift in her power ; but in pouring forth this , she was so very profuse , that others perhaps may think this single endowment to have been more than equivalent to all the various blessings which he enjoyed from nature .
From the former of these , he derived an agreeable person , a sound constitution , a solid understanding , and a benevolent heart ; by the latter , he was decreed to the inheritance of one of the largest estates in the county .
This gentleman had in his youth married a very worthy and beautiful woman , of whom he had been extremely fond : by her he had three children , all of whom died in their infancy .
He had likewise had the misfortune of burying this beloved wife herself , about five years before the time in which this history chuses to set out .
This loss , however great , he bore like a man of sense and constancy , though it must be confest he would often talk a little whimsically on this head ; for he sometimes said he looked on himself as still married , and considered his wife as only gone a little before him , a journey which he should most certainly , sooner or later , take after her ; and that he had not the least doubt of meeting her again in a place where he should never part with her more -- sentiments for which his sense was arraigned by one part of his neighbours , his religion by a second , and his sincerity by a third .
He now lived , for the most part , retired in the country , with one sister , for whom he had a very tender affection .
This lady was now somewhat past the age of thirty , an aera at which , in the opinion of the malicious , the title of old maid may with no impropriety be assumed .
She was of that species of women whom you commend rather for good qualities than beauty , and who are generally called , by their own sex , very good sort of women -- as good a sort of woman , madam , as you would wish to know .
Indeed , she was so far from regretting want of beauty , that she never mentioned that perfection , if it can be called one , without contempt ; and would often thank God she was not as handsome as Miss Such-a-one , whom perhaps beauty had led into errors which she might have otherwise avoided .
Miss Bridget Allworthy ( for that was the name of this lady ) very rightly conceived the charms of person in a woman to be no better than snares for herself , as well as for others ; and yet so discreet was she in her conduct , that her prudence was as much on the guard as if she had all the snares to apprehend which were ever laid for her whole sex .
Indeed , I have observed , though it may seem unaccountable to the reader , that this guard of prudence , like the trained bands , is always readiest to go on duty where there is the least danger .
It often basely and cowardly deserts those paragons for whom the men are all wishing , sighing , dying , and spreading every net in their power ; and constantly attends at the heels of that higher order of women for whom the other sex have a more distant and awful respect , and whom ( from despair , I suppose , of success ) they never venture to attack .
Reader , I think proper , before we proceed any farther together , to acquaint thee that I intend to digress , through this whole history , as often as I see occasion , of which I am myself a better judge than any pitiful critic whatever ; and here I must desire all those critics to mind their own business , and not to intermeddle with affairs or works which no ways concern them ; for till they produce the authority by which they are constituted judges , I shall not plead to their jurisdiction .
Chapter iii .
An odd accident which befel Mr Allworthy at his return home .
The decent behaviour of Mrs Deborah Wilkins , with some proper animadversions on bastards .
I have told my reader , in the preceding chapter , that Mr Allworthy inherited a large fortune ; that he had a good heart , and no family .
Hence , doubtless , it will be concluded by many that he lived like an honest man , owed no one a shilling , took nothing but what was his own , kept a good house , entertained his neighbours with a hearty welcome at his table , and was charitable to the poor , i.e. to those who had rather beg than work , by giving them the offals from it ; that he died immensely rich and built an hospital .
CHAPTER I THE CONSUL ’S YARN A week had passed since the funeral of my poor boy Harry , and one evening I was in my room walking up and down and thinking , when there was a ring at the outer door .
Going down the steps I opened it myself , and in came my old friends Sir Henry Curtis and Captain John Good , RN .
They entered the vestibule and sat themselves down before the wide hearth , where , I remember , a particularly good fire of logs was burning .
‘ It is very kind of you to come round , ’ I said by way of making a remark ; ‘ it must have been heavy walking in the snow . ’
They said nothing , but Sir Henry slowly filled his pipe and lit it with a burning ember .
As he leant forward to do so the fire got hold of a gassy bit of pine and flared up brightly , throwing the whole scene into strong relief , and I thought , What a splendid-looking man he is !
Calm , powerful face , clear-cut features , large grey eyes , yellow beard and hair -- altogether a magnificent specimen of the higher type of humanity .
Nor did his form belie his face .
I have never seen wider shoulders or a deeper chest .
Indeed , Sir Henry ’s girth is so great that , though he is six feet two high , he does not strike one as a tall man .
As I looked at him I could not help thinking what a curious contrast my little dried-up self presented to his grand face and form .
Imagine to yourself a small , withered , yellow-faced man of sixty-three , with thin hands , large brown eyes , a head of grizzled hair cut short and standing up like a half-worn scrubbing-brush -- total weight in my clothes , nine stone six -- and you will get a very fair idea of Allan Quatermain , commonly called Hunter Quatermain , or by the natives ‘ Macumazahn ’ -- Anglicè , he who keeps a bright look-out at night , or , in vulgar English , a sharp fellow who is not to be taken in .
Then there was Good , who is not like either of us , being short , dark , stout -- _ very _ stout -- with twinkling black eyes , in one of which an eyeglass is everlastingly fixed .
I say stout , but it is a mild term ; I regret to state that of late years Good has been running to fat in a most disgraceful way .
Sir Henry tells him that it comes from idleness and over-feeding , and Good does not like it at all , though he can not deny it .
We sat for a while , and then I got a match and lit the lamp that stood ready on the table , for the half-light began to grow dreary , as it is apt to do when one has a short week ago buried the hope of one ’s life .
Next , I opened a cupboard in the wainscoting and got a bottle of whisky and some tumblers and water .
I always like to do these things for myself : it is irritating to me to have somebody continually at my elbow , as though I were an eighteen-month-old baby .
All this while Curtis and Good had been silent , feeling , I suppose , that they had nothing to say that could do me any good , and content to give me the comfort of their presence and unspoken sympathy ; for it was only their second visit since the funeral .
And it is , by the way , from the _ presence _ of others that we really derive support in our dark hours of grief , and not from their talk , which often only serves to irritate us .
Before a bad storm the game always herd together , but they cease their calling .
They sat and smoked and drank whisky and water , and I stood by the fire also smoking and looking at them .
At last I spoke .
‘ Old friends , ’ I said , ‘ how long is it since we got back from Kukuanaland ? ’
‘ Three years , ’ said Good .
‘ Why do you ask ? ’
‘ I ask because I think that I have had a long enough spell of civilization .
I am going back to the veldt . ’
Sir Henry laid his head back in his arm-chair and laughed one of his deep laughs .
‘ How very odd , ’ he said , ‘ eh , Good ? ’
Good beamed at me mysteriously through his eyeglass and murmured , ‘ Yes , odd -- very odd . ’
‘ I do n’t quite understand , ’ said I , looking from one to the other , for I dislike mysteries .
‘ Do n’t you , old fellow ? ’
said Sir Henry ; ‘ then I will explain .
As Good and I were walking up here we had a talk . ’
‘ If Good was there you probably did , ’ I put in sarcastically , for Good is a great hand at talking .
‘ And what may it have been about ? ’
‘ What do you think ? ’
asked Sir Henry .
I shook my head .
It was not likely that I should know what Good might be talking about .
He talks about so many things .
‘ Well , it was about a little plan that I have formed -- namely , that if you were willing we should pack up our traps and go off to Africa on another expedition . ’
I fairly jumped at his words .
‘ You do n’t say so ! ’
I said .
‘ Yes I do , though , and so does Good ; do n’t you , Good ? ’
‘ Rather , ’ said that gentleman .
‘ Listen , old fellow , ’ went on Sir Henry , with considerable animation of manner .
‘ I ’m tired of it too , dead-tired of doing nothing more except play the squire in a country that is sick of squires .
For a year or more I have been getting as restless as an old elephant who scents danger .
I am always dreaming of Kukuanaland and Gagool and King Solomon ’s Mines .
I can assure you I have become the victim of an almost unaccountable craving .
I am sick of shooting pheasants and partridges , and want to have a go at some large game again .
There , you know the feeling -- when one has once tasted brandy and water , milk becomes insipid to the palate .
That year we spent together up in Kukuanaland seems to me worth all the other years of my life put together .
I dare say that I am a fool for my pains , but I ca n’t help it ; I long to go , and , what is more , I mean to go . ’
He paused , and then went on again .
‘ And , after all , why should I not go ?
I have no wife or parent , no chick or child to keep me .
If anything happens to me the baronetcy will go to my brother George and his boy , as it would ultimately do in any case .
I am of no importance to any one . ’
‘ Ah ! ’
I said , ‘ I thought you would come to that sooner or later .
And now , Good , what is your reason for wanting to trek ; have you got one ? ’
‘ I have , ’ said Good , solemnly .
‘ I never do anything without a reason ; and it is n’t a lady -- at least , if it is , it ’s several . ’
I looked at him again .
Good is so overpoweringly frivolous .
‘ What is it ? ’
I said .
‘ Well , if you really want to know , though I ’d rather not speak of a delicate and strictly personal matter , I ’ll tell you : I ’m getting too fat . ’
‘ Shut up , Good ! ’
said Sir Henry .
‘ And now , Quatermain , tell us , where do you propose going to ? ’
I lit my pipe , which had gone out , before answering .
‘ Have you people ever heard of Mt Kenia ? ’
I asked .
‘ Do n’t know the place , ’ said Good .
‘ Did you ever hear of the Island of Lamu ? ’
I asked again .
‘ No .
Stop , though -- is n’t it a place about 300 miles north of Zanzibar ? ’
‘ Yes .
Now listen .
What I have to propose is this .
That we go to Lamu and thence make our way about 250 miles inland to Mt Kenia ; from Mt Kenia on inland to Mt Lekakisera , another 200 miles , or thereabouts , beyond which no white man has to the best of my belief ever been ; and then , if we get so far , right on into the unknown interior .
What do you say to that , my hearties ? ’
‘ It ’s a big order , ’ said Sir Henry , reflectively .
‘ You are right , ’ I answered , ‘ it is ; but I take it that we are all three of us in search of a big order .
We want a change of scene , and we are likely to get one -- a thorough change .
All my life I have longed to visit those parts , and I mean to do it before I die .
My poor boy ’s death has broken the last link between me and civilization , and I ’m off to my native wilds .
And now I ’ll tell you another thing , and that is , that for years and years I have heard rumours of a great white race which is supposed to have its home somewhere up in this direction , and I have a mind to see if there is any truth in them .
If you fellows like to come , well and good ; if not , I ’ll go alone . ’
‘ I ’m your man , though I do n’t believe in your white race , ’ said Sir Henry Curtis , rising and placing his arm upon my shoulder .
‘ Ditto , ’ remarked Good .
‘ I ’ll go into training at once .
By all means let ’s go to Mt Kenia and the other place with an unpronounceable name , and look for a white race that does not exist .
It ’s all one to me . ’
‘ When do you propose to start ? ’
asked Sir Henry .
‘ This day month , ’ I answered , ‘ by the British India steamboat ; and do n’t you be so certain that things have no existence because you do not happen to have heard of them .
Remember King Solomon ’s mines ! ’
Some fourteen weeks or so had passed since the date of this conversation , and this history goes on its way in very different surroundings .
CHAPTER I TREATS OF THE PLACE WHERE OLIVER TWIST WAS BORN AND OF THE CIRCUMSTANCES ATTENDING HIS BIRTH Among other public buildings in a certain town , which for many reasons it will be prudent to refrain from mentioning , and to which I will assign no fictitious name , there is one anciently common to most towns , great or small : to wit , a workhouse ; and in this workhouse was born ; on a day and date which I need not trouble myself to repeat , inasmuch as it can be of no possible consequence to the reader , in this stage of the business at all events ; the item of mortality whose name is prefixed to the head of this chapter .
For a long time after it was ushered into this world of sorrow and trouble , by the parish surgeon , it remained a matter of considerable doubt whether the child would survive to bear any name at all ; in which case it is somewhat more than probable that these memoirs would never have appeared ; or , if they had , that being comprised within a couple of pages , they would have possessed the inestimable merit of being the most concise and faithful specimen of biography , extant in the literature of any age or country .
Although I am not disposed to maintain that the being born in a workhouse , is in itself the most fortunate and enviable circumstance that can possibly befall a human being , I do mean to say that in this particular instance , it was the best thing for Oliver Twist that could by possibility have occurred .
The fact is , that there was considerable difficulty in inducing Oliver to take upon himself the office of respiration , -- a troublesome practice , but one which custom has rendered necessary to our easy existence ; and for some time he lay gasping on a little flock mattress , rather unequally poised between this world and the next : the balance being decidedly in favour of the latter .
Now , if , during this brief period , Oliver had been surrounded by careful grandmothers , anxious aunts , experienced nurses , and doctors of profound wisdom , he would most inevitably and indubitably have been killed in no time .
There being nobody by , however , but a pauper old woman , who was rendered rather misty by an unwonted allowance of beer ; and a parish surgeon who did such matters by contract ; Oliver and Nature fought out the point between them .
The result was , that , after a few struggles , Oliver breathed , sneezed , and proceeded to advertise to the inmates of the workhouse the fact of a new burden having been imposed upon the parish , by setting up as loud a cry as could reasonably have been expected from a male infant who had not been possessed of that very useful appendage , a voice , for a much longer space of time than three minutes and a quarter .
As Oliver gave this first proof of the free and proper action of his lungs , the patchwork coverlet which was carelessly flung over the iron bedstead , rustled ; the pale face of a young woman was raised feebly from the pillow ; and a faint voice imperfectly articulated the words , ' Let me see the child , and die . '
The surgeon had been sitting with his face turned towards the fire : giving the palms of his hands a warm and a rub alternately .
As the young woman spoke , he rose , and advancing to the bed 's head , said , with more kindness than might have been expected of him : ' Oh , you must not talk about dying yet . '
' Lor bless her dear heart , no ! '
interposed the nurse , hastily depositing in her pocket a green glass bottle , the contents of which she had been tasting in a corner with evident satisfaction .
' Lor bless her dear heart , when she has lived as long as I have , sir , and had thirteen children of her own , and all on 'em dead except two , and them in the wurkus with me , she 'll know better than to take on in that way , bless her dear heart !
Think what it is to be a mother , there 's a dear young lamb do . '
Apparently this consolatory perspective of a mother 's prospects failed in producing its due effect .
The patient shook her head , and stretched out her hand towards the child .
The surgeon deposited it in her arms .
She imprinted her cold white lips passionately on its forehead ; passed her hands over her face ; gazed wildly round ; shuddered ; fell back -- and died .
They chafed her breast , hands , and temples ; but the blood had stopped forever .
They talked of hope and comfort .
They had been strangers too long .
' It 's all over , Mrs. Thingummy ! '
said the surgeon at last .
' Ah , poor dear , so it is ! '
said the nurse , picking up the cork of the green bottle , which had fallen out on the pillow , as she stooped to take up the child .
' Poor dear ! '
' You need n't mind sending up to me , if the child cries , nurse , ' said the surgeon , putting on his gloves with great deliberation .
' It 's very likely it _ will _ be troublesome .
Give it a little gruel if it is . '
He put on his hat , and , pausing by the bed-side on his way to the door , added , ' She was a good-looking girl , too ; where did she come from ? '
' She was brought here last night , ' replied the old woman , ' by the overseer 's order .
She was found lying in the street .
She had walked some distance , for her shoes were worn to pieces ; but where she came from , or where she was going to , nobody knows . '
The surgeon leaned over the body , and raised the left hand .
' The old story , ' he said , shaking his head : ' no wedding-ring , I see .
Ah !
Good-night ! '
The medical gentleman walked away to dinner ; and the nurse , having once more applied herself to the green bottle , sat down on a low chair before the fire , and proceeded to dress the infant .
What an excellent example of the power of dress , young Oliver Twist was !
Wrapped in the blanket which had hitherto formed his only covering , he might have been the child of a nobleman or a beggar ; it would have been hard for the haughtiest stranger to have assigned him his proper station in society .
But now that he was enveloped in the old calico robes which had grown yellow in the same service , he was badged and ticketed , and fell into his place at once -- a parish child -- the orphan of a workhouse -- the humble , half-starved drudge -- to be cuffed and buffeted through the world -- despised by all , and pitied by none .
Oliver cried lustily .
If he could have known that he was an orphan , left to the tender mercies of church-wardens and overseers , perhaps he would have cried the louder .
CHAPTER II TREATS OF OLIVER TWIST 'S GROWTH , EDUCATION , AND BOARD For the next eight or ten months , Oliver was the victim of a systematic course of treachery and deception .
He was brought up by hand .
The hungry and destitute situation of the infant orphan was duly reported by the workhouse authorities to the parish authorities .
The parish authorities inquired with dignity of the workhouse authorities , whether there was no female then domiciled in ' the house ' who was in a situation to impart to Oliver Twist , the consolation and nourishment of which he stood in need .
The workhouse authorities replied with humility , that there was not .
Upon this , the parish authorities magnanimously and humanely resolved , that Oliver should be ' farmed , ' or , in other words , that he should be dispatched to a branch-workhouse some three miles off , where twenty or thirty other juvenile offenders against the poor-laws , rolled about the floor all day , without the inconvenience of too much food or too much clothing , under the parental superintendence of an elderly female , who received the culprits at and for the consideration of sevenpence-halfpenny per small head per week .
Sevenpence-halfpenny 's worth per week is a good round diet for a child ; a great deal may be got for sevenpence-halfpenny , quite enough to overload its stomach , and make it uncomfortable .
The elderly female was a woman of wisdom and experience ; she knew what was good for children ; and she had a very accurate perception of what was good for herself .
So , she appropriated the greater part of the weekly stipend to her own use , and consigned the rising parochial generation to even a shorter allowance than was originally provided for them .
Thereby finding in the lowest depth a deeper still ; and proving herself a very great experimental philosopher .
Everybody knows the story of another experimental philosopher who had a great theory about a horse being able to live without eating , and who demonstrated it so well , that he had got his own horse down to a straw a day , and would unquestionably have rendered him a very spirited and rampacious animal on nothing at all , if he had not died , four-and-twenty hours before he was to have had his first comfortable bait of air .
Unfortunately for , the experimental philosophy of the female to whose protecting care Oliver Twist was delivered over , a similar result usually attended the operation of _ her _ system ; for at the very moment when the child had contrived to exist upon the smallest possible portion of the weakest possible food , it did perversely happen in eight and a half cases out of ten , either that it sickened from want and cold , or fell into the fire from neglect , or got half-smothered by accident ; in any one of which cases , the miserable little being was usually summoned into another world , and there gathered to the fathers it had never known in this .
Occasionally , when there was some more than usually interesting inquest upon a parish child who had been overlooked in turning up a bedstead , or inadvertently scalded to death when there happened to be a washing -- though the latter accident was very scarce , anything approaching to a washing being of rare occurrence in the farm -- the jury would take it into their heads to ask troublesome questions , or the parishioners would rebelliously affix their signatures to a remonstrance .
But these impertinences were speedily checked by the evidence of the surgeon , and the testimony of the beadle ; the former of whom had always opened the body and found nothing inside ( which was very probable indeed ) , and the latter of whom invariably swore whatever the parish wanted ; which was very self-devotional .
Besides , the board made periodical pilgrimages to the farm , and always sent the beadle the day before , to say they were going .
The children were neat and clean to behold , when _ they _ went ; and what more would the people have !
Chapter 1 The cold passed reluctantly from the earth , and the retiring fogs revealed an army stretched out on the hills , resting .
As the landscape changed from brown to green , the army awakened , and began to tremble with eagerness at the noise of rumors .
It cast its eyes upon the roads , which were growing from long troughs of liquid mud to proper thoroughfares .
A river , amber-tinted in the shadow of its banks , purled at the army 's feet ; and at night , when the stream had become of a sorrowful blackness , one could see across it the red , eyelike gleam of hostile camp-fires set in the low brows of distant hills .
Once a certain tall soldier developed virtues and went resolutely to wash a shirt .
He came flying back from a brook waving his garment bannerlike .
He was swelled with a tale he had heard from a reliable friend , who had heard it from a truthful cavalryman , who had heard it from his trustworthy brother , one of the orderlies at division headquarters .
He adopted the important air of a herald in red and gold .
" We 're goin ' t ' move t ' morrah -- sure , " he said pompously to a group in the company street .
" We 're goin ' ' way up the river , cut across , an ' come around in behint 'em . "
To his attentive audience he drew a loud and elaborate plan of a very brilliant campaign .
When he had finished , the blue-clothed men scattered into small arguing groups between the rows of squat brown huts .
A negro teamster who had been dancing upon a cracker box with the hilarious encouragement of twoscore soldiers was deserted .
He sat mournfully down .
Smoke drifted lazily from a multitude of quaint chimneys .
" It 's a lie !
that 's all it is -- a thunderin ' lie ! "
said another private loudly .
His smooth face was flushed , and his hands were thrust sulkily into his trouser 's pockets .
He took the matter as an affront to him .
" I do n't believe the derned old army 's ever going to move .
We 're set .
I 've got ready to move eight times in the last two weeks , and we ai n't moved yet . "
The tall soldier felt called upon to defend the truth of a rumor he himself had introduced .
He and the loud one came near to fighting over it .
A corporal began to swear before the assemblage .
He had just put a costly board floor in his house , he said .
During the early spring he had refrained from adding extensively to the comfort of his environment because he had felt that the army might start on the march at any moment .
Of late , however , he had been impressed that they were in a sort of eternal camp .
Many of the men engaged in a spirited debate .
One outlined in a peculiarly lucid manner all the plans of the commanding general .
He was opposed by men who advocated that there were other plans of campaign .
They clamored at each other , numbers making futile bids for the popular attention .
Meanwhile , the soldier who had fetched the rumor bustled about with much importance .
He was continually assailed by questions .
" What 's up , Jim ? "
" Th ' army 's goin ' t ' move . "
" Ah , what yeh talkin ' about ?
How yeh know it is ? "
" Well , yeh kin b ' lieve me er not , jest as yeh like .
I do n't care a hang . "
There was much food for thought in the manner in which he replied .
He came near to convincing them by disdaining to produce proofs .
They grew much excited over it .
There was a youthful private who listened with eager ears to the words of the tall soldier and to the varied comments of his comrades .
After receiving a fill of discussions concerning marches and attacks , he went to his hut and crawled through an intricate hole that served it as a door .
He wished to be alone with some new thoughts that had lately come to him .
He lay down on a wide bunk that stretched across the end of the room .
In the other end , cracker boxes were made to serve as furniture .
They were grouped about the fireplace .
A picture from an illustrated weekly was upon the log walls , and three rifles were paralleled on pegs .
Equipments hung on handy projections , and some tin dishes lay upon a small pile of firewood .
A folded tent was serving as a roof .
The sunlight , without , beating upon it , made it glow a light yellow shade .
A small window shot an oblique square of whiter light upon the cluttered floor .
The smoke from the fire at times neglected the clay chimney and wreathed into the room , and this flimsy chimney of clay and sticks made endless threats to set ablaze the whole establishment .
The youth was in a little trance of astonishment .
So they were at last going to fight .
On the morrow , perhaps , there would be a battle , and he would be in it .
For a time he was obliged to labor to make himself believe .
He could not accept with assurance an omen that he was about to mingle in one of those great affairs of the earth .
He had , of course , dreamed of battles all his life -- of vague and bloody conflicts that had thrilled him with their sweep and fire .
In visions he had seen himself in many struggles .
He had imagined peoples secure in the shadow of his eagle-eyed prowess .
But awake he had regarded battles as crimson blotches on the pages of the past .
He had put them as things of the bygone with his thought-images of heavy crowns and high castles .
There was a portion of the world 's history which he had regarded as the time of wars , but it , he thought , had been long gone over the horizon and had disappeared forever .
From his home his youthful eyes had looked upon the war in his own country with distrust .
It must be some sort of a play affair .
He had long despaired of witnessing a Greeklike struggle .
Such would be no more , he had said .
Men were better , or more timid .
Secular and religious education had effaced the throat-grappling instinct , or else firm finance held in check the passions .
He had burned several times to enlist .
Tales of great movements shook the land .
They might not be distinctly Homeric , but there seemed to be much glory in them .
He had read of marches , sieges , conflicts , and he had longed to see it all .
His busy mind had drawn for him large pictures extravagant in color , lurid with breathless deeds .
But his mother had discouraged him .
She had affected to look with some contempt upon the quality of his war ardor and patriotism .
She could calmly seat herself and with no apparent difficulty give him many hundreds of reasons why he was of vastly more importance on the farm than on the field of battle .
She had had certain ways of expression that told him that her statements on the subject came from a deep conviction .
Moreover , on her side , was his belief that her ethical motive in the argument was impregnable .
At last , however , he had made firm rebellion against this yellow light thrown upon the color of his ambitions .
The newspapers , the gossip of the village , his own picturings , had aroused him to an uncheckable degree .
They were in truth fighting finely down there .
Almost every day the newspaper printed accounts of a decisive victory .
One night , as he lay in bed , the winds had carried to him the clangoring of the church bell as some enthusiast jerked the rope frantically to tell the twisted news of a great battle .
This voice of the people rejoicing in the night had made him shiver in a prolonged ecstasy of excitement .
Later , he had gone down to his mother 's room and had spoken thus : " Ma , I 'm going to enlist . "
" Henry , do n't you be a fool , " his mother had replied .
She had then covered her face with the quilt .
There was an end to the matter for that night .
Nevertheless , the next morning he had gone to a town that was near his mother 's farm and had enlisted in a company that was forming there .
When he had returned home his mother was milking the brindle cow .
Four others stood waiting .
" Ma , I 've enlisted , " he had said to her diffidently .
There was a short silence .
" The Lord 's will be done , Henry , " she had finally replied , and had then continued to milk the brindle cow .
When he had stood in the doorway with his soldier 's clothes on his back , and with the light of excitement and expectancy in his eyes almost defeating the glow of regret for the home bonds , he had seen two tears leaving their trails on his mother 's scarred cheeks .
Still , she had disappointed him by saying nothing whatever about returning with his shield or on it .
He had privately primed himself for a beautiful scene .
He had prepared certain sentences which he thought could be used with touching effect .
But her words destroyed his plans .
She had doggedly peeled potatoes and addressed him as follows : " You watch out , Henry , an ' take good care of yerself in this here fighting business -- you watch , an ' take good care of yerself .
Do n't go a-thinkin ' you can lick the hull rebel army at the start , because yeh ca n't .
Yer jest one little feller amongst a hull lot of others , and yeh 've got to keep quiet an ' do what they tell yeh .
I know how you are , Henry .
" I 've knet yeh eight pair of socks , Henry , and I 've put in all yer best shirts , because I want my boy to be jest as warm and comf ' able as anybody in the army .
Whenever they get holes in 'em , I want yeh to send 'em right-away back to me , so 's I kin dern 'em .
" An ' allus be careful an ' choose yer comp ' ny .
There 's lots of bad men in the army , Henry .
The army makes 'em wild , and they like nothing better than the job of leading off a young feller like you , as ai n't never been away from home much and has allus had a mother , an ' a-learning 'em to drink and swear .
Keep clear of them folks , Henry .
I do n't want yeh to ever do anything , Henry , that yeh would be ' shamed to let me know about .
Jest think as if I was a-watchin ' yeh .
If yeh keep that in yer mind allus , I guess yeh 'll come out about right .
CHAPTER I “ TOM ! ”
No answer .
“ TOM ! ”
No answer .
“ What 's gone with that boy , I wonder ?
You TOM ! ”
No answer .
The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them about the room ; then she put them up and looked out under them .
She seldom or never looked _ through _ them for so small a thing as a boy ; they were her state pair , the pride of her heart , and were built for “ style , ” not service -- she could have seen through a pair of stove-lids just as well .
She looked perplexed for a moment , and then said , not fiercely , but still loud enough for the furniture to hear : “ Well , I lay if I get hold of you I 'll -- ” She did not finish , for by this time she was bending down and punching under the bed with the broom , and so she needed breath to punctuate the punches with .
She resurrected nothing but the cat .
“ I never did see the beat of that boy ! ”
She went to the open door and stood in it and looked out among the tomato vines and “ jimpson ” weeds that constituted the garden .
No Tom .
So she lifted up her voice at an angle calculated for distance and shouted : “ Y-o-u-u TOM ! ”
There was a slight noise behind her and she turned just in time to seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout and arrest his flight .
“ There !
I might ' a ' thought of that closet .
What you been doing in there ? ”
“ Nothing . ”
“ Nothing !
Look at your hands .
And look at your mouth .
What _ is _ that truck ? ”
“ I do n't know , aunt . ”
“ Well , I know .
It 's jam -- that 's what it is .
Forty times I 've said if you did n't let that jam alone I 'd skin you .
Hand me that switch . ”
The switch hovered in the air -- the peril was desperate -- “ My !
Look behind you , aunt ! ”
The old lady whirled round , and snatched her skirts out of danger .
The lad fled on the instant , scrambled up the high board-fence , and disappeared over it .
His aunt Polly stood surprised a moment , and then broke into a gentle laugh .
“ Hang the boy , ca n't I never learn anything ?
Ai n't he played me tricks enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time ?
But old fools is the biggest fools there is .
Ca n't learn an old dog new tricks , as the saying is .
But my goodness , he never plays them alike , two days , and how is a body to know what 's coming ?
He ' pears to know just how long he can torment me before I get my dander up , and he knows if he can make out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh , it 's all down again and I ca n't hit him a lick .
I ai n't doing my duty by that boy , and that 's the Lord 's truth , goodness knows .
Spare the rod and spile the child , as the Good Book says .
I 'm a laying up sin and suffering for us both , I know .
He 's full of the Old Scratch , but laws-a-me !
he 's my own dead sister 's boy , poor thing , and I ai n't got the heart to lash him , somehow .
Every time I let him off , my conscience does hurt me so , and every time I hit him my old heart most breaks .
Well-a-well , man that is born of woman is of few days and full of trouble , as the Scripture says , and I reckon it 's so .
He 'll play hookey this evening , * and [ * Southwestern for “ afternoon ” ] I 'll just be obleeged to make him work , tomorrow , to punish him .
It 's mighty hard to make him work Saturdays , when all the boys is having holiday , but he hates work more than he hates anything else , and I 've _ got _ to do some of my duty by him , or I 'll be the ruination of the child . ”
Tom did play hookey , and he had a very good time .
He got back home barely in season to help Jim , the small colored boy , saw next-day 's wood and split the kindlings before supper -- at least he was there in time to tell his adventures to Jim while Jim did three-fourths of the work .
Tom 's younger brother ( or rather half-brother ) Sid was already through with his part of the work ( picking up chips ) , for he was a quiet boy , and had no adventurous , trouble-some ways .
While Tom was eating his supper , and stealing sugar as opportunity offered , Aunt Polly asked him questions that were full of guile , and very deep -- for she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments .
Like many other simple-hearted souls , it was her pet vanity to believe she was endowed with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy , and she loved to contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low cunning .
Said she : “ Tom , it was middling warm in school , war n't it ? ”
“ Yes 'm . ”
“ Powerful warm , war n't it ? ”
“ Yes 'm . ”
“ Did n't you want to go in a-swimming , Tom ? ”
A bit of a scare shot through Tom -- a touch of uncomfortable suspicion .
He searched Aunt Polly 's face , but it told him nothing .
So he said : “ No 'm -- well , not very much . ”
The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom 's shirt , and said : “ But you ai n't too warm now , though . ”
And it flattered her to reflect that she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing that that was what she had in her mind .
But in spite of her , Tom knew where the wind lay , now .
So he forestalled what might be the next move : “ Some of us pumped on our heads -- mine 's damp yet .
See ? ”
Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of circumstantial evidence , and missed a trick .
Then she had a new inspiration : “ Tom , you did n't have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it , to pump on your head , did you ?
Unbutton your jacket ! ”
The trouble vanished out of Tom 's face .
He opened his jacket .
His shirt collar was securely sewed .
“ Bother !
Well , go ' long with you .
I 'd made sure you 'd played hookey and been a-swimming .
But I forgive ye , Tom .
I reckon you 're a kind of a singed cat , as the saying is -- better 'n you look .
_ This _ time . ”
She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried , and half glad that Tom had stumbled into obedient conduct for once .
But Sidney said : “ Well , now , if I did n't think you sewed his collar with white thread , but it 's black . ”
“ Why , I did sew it with white !
Tom ! ”
But Tom did not wait for the rest .
As he went out at the door he said : “ Siddy , I 'll lick you for that . ”
In a safe place Tom examined two large needles which were thrust into the lapels of his jacket , and had thread bound about them -- one needle carried white thread and the other black .
He said : “ She 'd never noticed if it had n't been for Sid .
Confound it !
sometimes she sews it with white , and sometimes she sews it with black .
I wish to gee-miny she 'd stick to one or t ' other -- I ca n't keep the run of 'em .
But I bet you I 'll lam Sid for that .
I 'll learn him ! ”
He was not the Model Boy of the village .
He knew the model boy very well though -- and loathed him .
Within two minutes , or even less , he had forgotten all his troubles .
Not because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him than a man 's are to a man , but because a new and powerful interest bore them down and drove them out of his mind for the time -- just as men 's misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises .
This new interest was a valued novelty in whistling , which he had just acquired from a negro , and he was suffering to practise it un-disturbed .
It consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn , a sort of liquid warble , produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short intervals in the midst of the music -- the reader probably remembers how to do it , if he has ever been a boy .
Diligence and attention soon gave him the knack of it , and he strode down the street with his mouth full of harmony and his soul full of gratitude .
He felt much as an astronomer feels who has discovered a new planet -- no doubt , as far as strong , deep , unalloyed pleasure is concerned , the advantage was with the boy , not the astronomer .
The summer evenings were long .
It was not dark , yet .
Presently Tom checked his whistle .
A stranger was before him -- a boy a shade larger than himself .
A new-comer of any age or either sex was an im-pressive curiosity in the poor little shabby village of St. Petersburg .
This boy was well dressed , too -- well dressed on a week-day .
This was simply as astounding .
His cap was a dainty thing , his close-buttoned blue cloth roundabout was new and natty , and so were his pantaloons .
He had shoes on -- and it was only Friday .
He even wore a necktie , a bright bit of ribbon .
He had a citified air about him that ate into Tom 's vitals .
The more Tom stared at the splendid marvel , the higher he turned up his nose at his finery and the shabbier and shabbier his own outfit seemed to him to grow .
Neither boy spoke .
If one moved , the other moved -- but only sidewise , in a circle ; they kept face to face and eye to eye all the time .
Finally Tom said : “ I can lick you ! ”
“ I 'd like to see you try it . ”
“ Well , I can do it . ”
CHAPTER 1 .
I AM BORN Whether I shall turn out to be the hero of my own life , or whether that station will be held by anybody else , these pages must show .
To begin my life with the beginning of my life , I record that I was born ( as I have been informed and believe ) on a Friday , at twelve o’clock at night .
It was remarked that the clock began to strike , and I began to cry , simultaneously .
In consideration of the day and hour of my birth , it was declared by the nurse , and by some sage women in the neighbourhood who had taken a lively interest in me several months before there was any possibility of our becoming personally acquainted , first , that I was destined to be unlucky in life ; and secondly , that I was privileged to see ghosts and spirits ; both these gifts inevitably attaching , as they believed , to all unlucky infants of either gender , born towards the small hours on a Friday night .
I need say nothing here , on the first head , because nothing can show better than my history whether that prediction was verified or falsified by the result .
On the second branch of the question , I will only remark , that unless I ran through that part of my inheritance while I was still a baby , I have not come into it yet .
But I do not at all complain of having been kept out of this property ; and if anybody else should be in the present enjoyment of it , he is heartily welcome to keep it .
I was born with a caul , which was advertised for sale , in the newspapers , at the low price of fifteen guineas .
Whether sea-going people were short of money about that time , or were short of faith and preferred cork jackets , I do n’t know ; all I know is , that there was but one solitary bidding , and that was from an attorney connected with the bill-broking business , who offered two pounds in cash , and the balance in sherry , but declined to be guaranteed from drowning on any higher bargain .
Consequently the advertisement was withdrawn at a dead loss -- for as to sherry , my poor dear mother ’s own sherry was in the market then -- and ten years afterwards , the caul was put up in a raffle down in our part of the country , to fifty members at half-a-crown a head , the winner to spend five shillings .
I was present myself , and I remember to have felt quite uncomfortable and confused , at a part of myself being disposed of in that way .
The caul was won , I recollect , by an old lady with a hand-basket , who , very reluctantly , produced from it the stipulated five shillings , all in halfpence , and twopence halfpenny short -- as it took an immense time and a great waste of arithmetic , to endeavour without any effect to prove to her .
It is a fact which will be long remembered as remarkable down there , that she was never drowned , but died triumphantly in bed , at ninety-two .
I have understood that it was , to the last , her proudest boast , that she never had been on the water in her life , except upon a bridge ; and that over her tea ( to which she was extremely partial ) she , to the last , expressed her indignation at the impiety of mariners and others , who had the presumption to go ‘ meandering ’ about the world .
It was in vain to represent to her that some conveniences , tea perhaps included , resulted from this objectionable practice .
She always returned , with greater emphasis and with an instinctive knowledge of the strength of her objection , ‘ Let us have no meandering . ’
Not to meander myself , at present , I will go back to my birth .
I was born at Blunderstone , in Suffolk , or ‘ there by ’ , as they say in Scotland .
I was a posthumous child .
My father ’s eyes had closed upon the light of this world six months , when mine opened on it .
There is something strange to me , even now , in the reflection that he never saw me ; and something stranger yet in the shadowy remembrance that I have of my first childish associations with his white grave-stone in the churchyard , and of the indefinable compassion I used to feel for it lying out alone there in the dark night , when our little parlour was warm and bright with fire and candle , and the doors of our house were -- almost cruelly , it seemed to me sometimes -- bolted and locked against it .
An aunt of my father ’s , and consequently a great-aunt of mine , of whom I shall have more to relate by and by , was the principal magnate of our family .
Miss Trotwood , or Miss Betsey , as my poor mother always called her , when she sufficiently overcame her dread of this formidable personage to mention her at all ( which was seldom ) , had been married to a husband younger than herself , who was very handsome , except in the sense of the homely adage , ‘ handsome is , that handsome does ’ -- for he was strongly suspected of having beaten Miss Betsey , and even of having once , on a disputed question of supplies , made some hasty but determined arrangements to throw her out of a two pair of stairs ’ window .
These evidences of an incompatibility of temper induced Miss Betsey to pay him off , and effect a separation by mutual consent .
He went to India with his capital , and there , according to a wild legend in our family , he was once seen riding on an elephant , in company with a Baboon ; but I think it must have been a Baboo -- or a Begum .
Anyhow , from India tidings of his death reached home , within ten years .
How they affected my aunt , nobody knew ; for immediately upon the separation , she took her maiden name again , bought a cottage in a hamlet on the sea-coast a long way off , established herself there as a single woman with one servant , and was understood to live secluded , ever afterwards , in an inflexible retirement .
My father had once been a favourite of hers , I believe ; but she was mortally affronted by his marriage , on the ground that my mother was ‘ a wax doll ’ .
She had never seen my mother , but she knew her to be not yet twenty .
My father and Miss Betsey never met again .
He was double my mother ’s age when he married , and of but a delicate constitution .
He died a year afterwards , and , as I have said , six months before I came into the world .
This was the state of matters , on the afternoon of , what I may be excused for calling , that eventful and important Friday .
I can make no claim therefore to have known , at that time , how matters stood ; or to have any remembrance , founded on the evidence of my own senses , of what follows .
My mother was sitting by the fire , but poorly in health , and very low in spirits , looking at it through her tears , and desponding heavily about herself and the fatherless little stranger , who was already welcomed by some grosses of prophetic pins , in a drawer upstairs , to a world not at all excited on the subject of his arrival ; my mother , I say , was sitting by the fire , that bright , windy March afternoon , very timid and sad , and very doubtful of ever coming alive out of the trial that was before her , when , lifting her eyes as she dried them , to the window opposite , she saw a strange lady coming up the garden .
My mother had a sure foreboding at the second glance , that it was Miss Betsey .
The setting sun was glowing on the strange lady , over the garden-fence , and she came walking up to the door with a fell rigidity of figure and composure of countenance that could have belonged to nobody else .
When she reached the house , she gave another proof of her identity .
My father had often hinted that she seldom conducted herself like any ordinary Christian ; and now , instead of ringing the bell , she came and looked in at that identical window , pressing the end of her nose against the glass to that extent , that my poor dear mother used to say it became perfectly flat and white in a moment .
She gave my mother such a turn , that I have always been convinced I am indebted to Miss Betsey for having been born on a Friday .
My mother had left her chair in her agitation , and gone behind it in the corner .
Miss Betsey , looking round the room , slowly and inquiringly , began on the other side , and carried her eyes on , like a Saracen ’s Head in a Dutch clock , until they reached my mother .
Then she made a frown and a gesture to my mother , like one who was accustomed to be obeyed , to come and open the door .
My mother went .
‘ Mrs. David Copperfield , I think , ’ said Miss Betsey ; the emphasis referring , perhaps , to my mother ’s mourning weeds , and her condition .
‘ Yes , ’ said my mother , faintly .
‘ Miss Trotwood , ’ said the visitor .
‘ You have heard of her , I dare say ? ’
My mother answered she had had that pleasure .
And she had a disagreeable consciousness of not appearing to imply that it had been an overpowering pleasure .
‘ Now you see her , ’ said Miss Betsey .
My mother bent her head , and begged her to walk in .
They went into the parlour my mother had come from , the fire in the best room on the other side of the passage not being lighted -- not having been lighted , indeed , since my father ’s funeral ; and when they were both seated , and Miss Betsey said nothing , my mother , after vainly trying to restrain herself , began to cry .
‘ Oh tut , tut , tut ! ’
said Miss Betsey , in a hurry .
‘ Do n’t do that !
Come , come ! ’
My mother could n’t help it notwithstanding , so she cried until she had had her cry out .
‘ Take off your cap , child , ’ said Miss Betsey , ‘ and let me see you . ’
My mother was too much afraid of her to refuse compliance with this odd request , if she had any disposition to do so .
Therefore she did as she was told , and did it with such nervous hands that her hair ( which was luxuriant and beautiful ) fell all about her face .
‘CHAPTER I 1801 .
-- I have just returned from a visit to my landlord -- the solitary neighbour that I shall be troubled with .
This is certainly a beautiful country !
In all England , I do not believe that I could have fixed on a situation so completely removed from the stir of society .
A perfect misanthropist 's heaven : and Mr. Heathcliff and I are such a suitable pair to divide the desolation between us .
A capital fellow !
He little imagined how my heart warmed towards him when I beheld his black eyes withdraw so suspiciously under their brows , as I rode up , and when his fingers sheltered themselves , with a jealous resolution , still further in his waistcoat , as I announced my name .
' Mr. Heathcliff ? '
I said .
A nod was the answer .
' Mr. Lockwood , your new tenant , sir .
I do myself the honour of calling as soon as possible after my arrival , to express the hope that I have not inconvenienced you by my perseverance in soliciting the occupation of Thrushcross Grange : I heard yesterday you had had some thoughts -- ' ' Thrushcross Grange is my own , sir , ' he interrupted , wincing . '
I should not allow any one to inconvenience me , if I could hinder it -- walk in ! '
The ' walk in ' was uttered with closed teeth , and expressed the sentiment , ' Go to the Deuce : ' even the gate over which he leant manifested no sympathising movement to the words ; and I think that circumstance determined me to accept the invitation : I felt interested in a man who seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself .
When he saw my horse 's breast fairly pushing the barrier , he did put out his hand to unchain it , and then sullenly preceded me up the causeway , calling , as we entered the court , -- ' Joseph , take Mr. Lockwood 's horse ; and bring up some wine . '
' Here we have the whole establishment of domestics , I suppose , ' was the reflection suggested by this compound order .
' No wonder the grass grows up between the flags , and cattle are the only hedge-cutters . '
Joseph was an elderly , nay , an old man : very old , perhaps , though hale and sinewy .
' The Lord help us ! '
he soliloquised in an undertone of peevish displeasure , while relieving me of my horse : looking , meantime , in my face so sourly that I charitably conjectured he must have need of divine aid to digest his dinner , and his pious ejaculation had no reference to my unexpected advent .
Wuthering Heights is the name of Mr. Heathcliff 's dwelling .
' Wuthering ' being a significant provincial adjective , descriptive of the atmospheric tumult to which its station is exposed in stormy weather .
Pure , bracing ventilation they must have up there at all times , indeed : one may guess the power of the north wind blowing over the edge , by the excessive slant of a few stunted firs at the end of the house ; and by a range of gaunt thorns all stretching their limbs one way , as if craving alms of the sun .
Happily , the architect had foresight to build it strong : the narrow windows are deeply set in the wall , and the corners defended with large jutting stones .
Before passing the threshold , I paused to admire a quantity of grotesque carving lavished over the front , and especially about the principal door ; above which , among a wilderness of crumbling griffins and shameless little boys , I detected the date ' 1500 , ' and the name ' Hareton Earnshaw . '
I would have made a few comments , and requested a short history of the place from the surly owner ; but his attitude at the door appeared to demand my speedy entrance , or complete departure , and I had no desire to aggravate his impatience previous to inspecting the penetralium .
One stop brought us into the family sitting-room , without any introductory lobby or passage : they call it here ' the house ' pre-eminently .
It includes kitchen and parlour , generally ; but I believe at Wuthering Heights the kitchen is forced to retreat altogether into another quarter : at least I distinguished a chatter of tongues , and a clatter of culinary utensils , deep within ; and I observed no signs of roasting , boiling , or baking , about the huge fireplace ; nor any glitter of copper saucepans and tin cullenders on the walls .
One end , indeed , reflected splendidly both light and heat from ranks of immense pewter dishes , interspersed with silver jugs and tankards , towering row after row , on a vast oak dresser , to the very roof .
The latter had never been under-drawn : its entire anatomy lay bare to an inquiring eye , except where a frame of wood laden with oatcakes and clusters of legs of beef , mutton , and ham , concealed it .
Above the chimney were sundry villainous old guns , and a couple of horse-pistols : and , by way of ornament , three gaudily-painted canisters disposed along its ledge .
The floor was of smooth , white stone ; the chairs , high-backed , primitive structures , painted green : one or two heavy black ones lurking in the shade .
In an arch under the dresser reposed a huge , liver-coloured bitch pointer , surrounded by a swarm of squealing puppies ; and other dogs haunted other recesses .
The apartment and furniture would have been nothing extraordinary as belonging to a homely , northern farmer , with a stubborn countenance , and stalwart limbs set out to advantage in knee-breeches and gaiters .
Such an individual seated in his arm-chair , his mug of ale frothing on the round table before him , is to be seen in any circuit of five or six miles among these hills , if you go at the right time after dinner .
But Mr. Heathcliff forms a singular contrast to his abode and style of living .
He is a dark-skinned gipsy in aspect , in dress and manners a gentleman : that is , as much a gentleman as many a country squire : rather slovenly , perhaps , yet not looking amiss with his negligence , because he has an erect and handsome figure ; and rather morose .
Possibly , some people might suspect him of a degree of under-bred pride ; I have a sympathetic chord within that tells me it is nothing of the sort : I know , by instinct , his reserve springs from an aversion to showy displays of feeling -- to manifestations of mutual kindliness .
He 'll love and hate equally under cover , and esteem it a species of impertinence to be loved or hated again .
No , I 'm running on too fast : I bestow my own attributes over-liberally on him .
Mr. Heathcliff may have entirely dissimilar reasons for keeping his hand out of the way when he meets a would-be acquaintance , to those which actuate me .
Let me hope my constitution is almost peculiar : my dear mother used to say I should never have a comfortable home ; and only last summer I proved myself perfectly unworthy of one .
While enjoying a month of fine weather at the sea-coast , I was thrown into the company of a most fascinating creature : a real goddess in my eyes , as long as she took no notice of me .
I ' never told my love ' vocally ; still , if looks have language , the merest idiot might have guessed I was over head and ears : she understood me at last , and looked a return -- the sweetest of all imaginable looks .
And what did I do ?
I confess it with shame -- shrunk icily into myself , like a snail ; at every glance retired colder and farther ; till finally the poor innocent was led to doubt her own senses , and , overwhelmed with confusion at her supposed mistake , persuaded her mamma to decamp .
By this curious turn of disposition I have gained the reputation of deliberate heartlessness ; how undeserved , I alone can appreciate .
I took a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards which my landlord advanced , and filled up an interval of silence by attempting to caress the canine mother , who had left her nursery , and was sneaking wolfishly to the back of my legs , her lip curled up , and her white teeth watering for a snatch .
My caress provoked a long , guttural gnarl .
' You 'd better let the dog alone , ' growled Mr. Heathcliff in unison , checking fiercer demonstrations with a punch of his foot .
' She 's not accustomed to be spoiled -- not kept for a pet . '
Then , striding to a side door , he shouted again , ' Joseph ! '
Joseph mumbled indistinctly in the depths of the cellar , but gave no intimation of ascending ; so his master dived down to him , leaving me _ vis-a-vis _ the ruffianly bitch and a pair of grim shaggy sheep-dogs , who shared with her a jealous guardianship over all my movements .
Not anxious to come in contact with their fangs , I sat still ; but , imagining they would scarcely understand tacit insults , I unfortunately indulged in winking and making faces at the trio , and some turn of my physiognomy so irritated madam , that she suddenly broke into a fury and leapt on my knees .
I flung her back , and hastened to interpose the table between us .
This proceeding aroused the whole hive : half-a-dozen four-footed fiends , of various sizes and ages , issued from hidden dens to the common centre .
I felt my heels and coat-laps peculiar subjects of assault ; and parrying off the larger combatants as effectually as I could with the poker , I was constrained to demand , aloud , assistance from some of the household in re-establishing peace .
Mr. Heathcliff and his man climbed the cellar steps with vexatious phlegm : I do n't think they moved one second faster than usual , though the hearth was an absolute tempest of worrying and yelping .
Happily , an inhabitant of the kitchen made more despatch : a lusty dame , with tucked-up gown , bare arms , and fire-flushed cheeks , rushed into the midst of us flourishing a frying-pan : and used that weapon , and her tongue , to such purpose , that the storm subsided magically , and she only remained , heaving like a sea after a high wind , when her master entered on the scene .
' What the devil is the matter ? '
he asked , eyeing me in a manner that I could ill endure , after this inhospitable treatment .
' What the devil , indeed ! '
I muttered .
' The herd of possessed swine could have had no worse spirits in them than those animals of yours , sir .
You might as well leave a stranger with a brood of tigers ! '
' They wo n't meddle with persons who touch nothing , ' he remarked , putting the bottle before me , and restoring the displaced table .
' The dogs do right to be vigilant .
Take a glass of wine ? '
CHAPTER I .
YOU do n't know about me without you have read a book by the name of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer ; but that ai n't no matter .
That book was made by Mr. Mark Twain , and he told the truth , mainly .
There was things which he stretched , but mainly he told the truth .
That is nothing .
I never seen anybody but lied one time or another , without it was Aunt Polly , or the widow , or maybe Mary .
Aunt Polly -- Tom 's Aunt Polly , she is -- and Mary , and the Widow Douglas is all told about in that book , which is mostly a true book , with some stretchers , as I said before .
Now the way that the book winds up is this : Tom and me found the money that the robbers hid in the cave , and it made us rich .
We got six thousand dollars apiece -- all gold .
It was an awful sight of money when it was piled up .
Well , Judge Thatcher he took it and put it out at interest , and it fetched us a dollar a day apiece all the year round -- more than a body could tell what to do with .
The Widow Douglas she took me for her son , and allowed she would sivilize me ; but it was rough living in the house all the time , considering how dismal regular and decent the widow was in all her ways ; and so when I could n't stand it no longer I lit out .
I got into my old rags and my sugar-hogshead again , and was free and satisfied .
But Tom Sawyer he hunted me up and said he was going to start a band of robbers , and I might join if I would go back to the widow and be respectable .
So I went back .
The widow she cried over me , and called me a poor lost lamb , and she called me a lot of other names , too , but she never meant no harm by it .
She put me in them new clothes again , and I could n't do nothing but sweat and sweat , and feel all cramped up .
Well , then , the old thing commenced again .
The widow rung a bell for supper , and you had to come to time .
When you got to the table you could n't go right to eating , but you had to wait for the widow to tuck down her head and grumble a little over the victuals , though there war n't really anything the matter with them , -- that is , nothing only everything was cooked by itself .
In a barrel of odds and ends it is different ; things get mixed up , and the juice kind of swaps around , and the things go better .
After supper she got out her book and learned me about Moses and the Bulrushers , and I was in a sweat to find out all about him ; but by and by she let it out that Moses had been dead a considerable long time ; so then I did n't care no more about him , because I do n't take no stock in dead people .
Pretty soon I wanted to smoke , and asked the widow to let me .
But she would n't .
She said it was a mean practice and was n't clean , and I must try to not do it any more .
That is just the way with some people .
They get down on a thing when they do n't know nothing about it .
Here she was a-bothering about Moses , which was no kin to her , and no use to anybody , being gone , you see , yet finding a power of fault with me for doing a thing that had some good in it .
And she took snuff , too ; of course that was all right , because she done it herself .
Her sister , Miss Watson , a tolerable slim old maid , with goggles on , had just come to live with her , and took a set at me now with a spelling-book .
She worked me middling hard for about an hour , and then the widow made her ease up .
I could n't stood it much longer .
Then for an hour it was deadly dull , and I was fidgety .
Miss Watson would say , “ Do n't put your feet up there , Huckleberry ; ” and “ Do n't scrunch up like that , Huckleberry -- set up straight ; ” and pretty soon she would say , “ Do n't gap and stretch like that , Huckleberry -- why do n't you try to behave ? ”
Then she told me all about the bad place , and I said I wished I was there .
She got mad then , but I did n't mean no harm .
All I wanted was to go somewheres ; all I wanted was a change , I war n't particular .
She said it was wicked to say what I said ; said she would n't say it for the whole world ; she was going to live so as to go to the good place .
Well , I could n't see no advantage in going where she was going , so I made up my mind I would n't try for it .
But I never said so , because it would only make trouble , and would n't do no good .
Now she had got a start , and she went on and told me all about the good place .
She said all a body would have to do there was to go around all day long with a harp and sing , forever and ever .
So I did n't think much of it .
But I never said so .
I asked her if she reckoned Tom Sawyer would go there , and she said not by a considerable sight .
I was glad about that , because I wanted him and me to be together .
Miss Watson she kept pecking at me , and it got tiresome and lonesome .
By and by they fetched the niggers in and had prayers , and then everybody was off to bed .
I went up to my room with a piece of candle , and put it on the table .
Then I set down in a chair by the window and tried to think of something cheerful , but it war n't no use .
I felt so lonesome I most wished I was dead .
The stars were shining , and the leaves rustled in the woods ever so mournful ; and I heard an owl , away off , who-whooing about somebody that was dead , and a whippowill and a dog crying about somebody that was going to die ; and the wind was trying to whisper something to me , and I could n't make out what it was , and so it made the cold shivers run over me .
Then away out in the woods I heard that kind of a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell about something that 's on its mind and ca n't make itself understood , and so ca n't rest easy in its grave , and has to go about that way every night grieving .
I got so down-hearted and scared I did wish I had some company .
Pretty soon a spider went crawling up my shoulder , and I flipped it off and it lit in the candle ; and before I could budge it was all shriveled up .
I did n't need anybody to tell me that that was an awful bad sign and would fetch me some bad luck , so I was scared and most shook the clothes off of me .
I got up and turned around in my tracks three times and crossed my breast every time ; and then I tied up a little lock of my hair with a thread to keep witches away .
But I had n't no confidence .
You do that when you 've lost a horseshoe that you 've found , instead of nailing it up over the door , but I had n't ever heard anybody say it was any way to keep off bad luck when you 'd killed a spider .
I set down again , a-shaking all over , and got out my pipe for a smoke ; for the house was all as still as death now , and so the widow would n't know .
Well , after a long time I heard the clock away off in the town go boom -- boom -- boom -- twelve licks ; and all still again -- stiller than ever .
Pretty soon I heard a twig snap down in the dark amongst the trees -- something was a stirring .
I set still and listened .
Directly I could just barely hear a “ me-yow !
me-yow ! ”
down there .
That was good !
Says I , “ me-yow !
me-yow ! ”
as soft as I could , and then I put out the light and scrambled out of the window on to the shed .
Then I slipped down to the ground and crawled in among the trees , and , sure enough , there was Tom Sawyer waiting for me .
CHAPTER II .
WE went tiptoeing along a path amongst the trees back towards the end of the widow 's garden , stooping down so as the branches would n't scrape our heads .
When we was passing by the kitchen I fell over a root and made a noise .
We scrouched down and laid still .
Miss Watson 's big nigger , named Jim , was setting in the kitchen door ; we could see him pretty clear , because there was a light behind him .
He got up and stretched his neck out about a minute , listening .
Then he says : “ Who dah ? ”
He listened some more ; then he come tiptoeing down and stood right between us ; we could a touched him , nearly .
Well , likely it was minutes and minutes that there war n't a sound , and we all there so close together .
There was a place on my ankle that got to itching , but I das n't scratch it ; and then my ear begun to itch ; and next my back , right between my shoulders .
Seemed like I 'd die if I could n't scratch .
Well , I 've noticed that thing plenty times since .
If you are with the quality , or at a funeral , or trying to go to sleep when you ai n't sleepy -- if you are anywheres where it wo n't do for you to scratch , why you will itch all over in upwards of a thousand places .
Pretty soon Jim says : “ Say , who is you ?
Whar is you ?
Dog my cats ef I didn ' hear sumf ' n. Well , I know what I 's gwyne to do : I 's gwyne to set down here and listen tell I hears it agin . ”
So he set down on the ground betwixt me and Tom .
He leaned his back up against a tree , and stretched his legs out till one of them most touched one of mine .
My nose begun to itch .
It itched till the tears come into my eyes .
But I das n't scratch .
Then it begun to itch on the inside .
Next I got to itching underneath .
I did n't know how I was going to set still .
This miserableness went on as much as six or seven minutes ; but it seemed a sight longer than that .
I was itching in eleven different places now .
I reckoned I could n't stand it more 'n a minute longer , but I set my teeth hard and got ready to try .
Just then Jim begun to breathe heavy ; next he begun to snore -- and then I was pretty soon comfortable again .
I The Old Pyncheon Family HALFWAY down a by-street of one of our New England towns stands a rusty wooden house , with seven acutely peaked gables , facing towards various points of the compass , and a huge , clustered chimney in the midst .
The street is Pyncheon Street ; the house is the old Pyncheon House ; and an elm-tree , of wide circumference , rooted before the door , is familiar to every town-born child by the title of the Pyncheon Elm .
On my occasional visits to the town aforesaid , I seldom failed to turn down Pyncheon Street , for the sake of passing through the shadow of these two antiquities , -- the great elm-tree and the weather-beaten edifice .
The aspect of the venerable mansion has always affected me like a human countenance , bearing the traces not merely of outward storm and sunshine , but expressive also , of the long lapse of mortal life , and accompanying vicissitudes that have passed within .
Were these to be worthily recounted , they would form a narrative of no small interest and instruction , and possessing , moreover , a certain remarkable unity , which might almost seem the result of artistic arrangement .
But the story would include a chain of events extending over the better part of two centuries , and , written out with reasonable amplitude , would fill a bigger folio volume , or a longer series of duodecimos , than could prudently be appropriated to the annals of all New England during a similar period .
It consequently becomes imperative to make short work with most of the traditionary lore of which the old Pyncheon House , otherwise known as the House of the Seven Gables , has been the theme .
With a brief sketch , therefore , of the circumstances amid which the foundation of the house was laid , and a rapid glimpse at its quaint exterior , as it grew black in the prevalent east wind , -- pointing , too , here and there , at some spot of more verdant mossiness on its roof and walls , -- we shall commence the real action of our tale at an epoch not very remote from the present day .
Still , there will be a connection with the long past -- a reference to forgotten events and personages , and to manners , feelings , and opinions , almost or wholly obsolete -- which , if adequately translated to the reader , would serve to illustrate how much of old material goes to make up the freshest novelty of human life .
Hence , too , might be drawn a weighty lesson from the little-regarded truth , that the act of the passing generation is the germ which may and must produce good or evil fruit in a far-distant time ; that , together with the seed of the merely temporary crop , which mortals term expediency , they inevitably sow the acorns of a more enduring growth , which may darkly overshadow their posterity .
The House of the Seven Gables , antique as it now looks , was not the first habitation erected by civilized man on precisely the same spot of ground .
Pyncheon Street formerly bore the humbler appellation of Maule 's Lane , from the name of the original occupant of the soil , before whose cottage-door it was a cow-path .
A natural spring of soft and pleasant water -- a rare treasure on the sea-girt peninsula where the Puritan settlement was made -- had early induced Matthew Maule to build a hut , shaggy with thatch , at this point , although somewhat too remote from what was then the centre of the village .
In the growth of the town , however , after some thirty or forty years , the site covered by this rude hovel had become exceedingly desirable in the eyes of a prominent and powerful personage , who asserted plausible claims to the proprietorship of this and a large adjacent tract of land , on the strength of a grant from the legislature .
Colonel Pyncheon , the claimant , as we gather from whatever traits of him are preserved , was characterized by an iron energy of purpose .
Matthew Maule , on the other hand , though an obscure man , was stubborn in the defence of what he considered his right ; and , for several years , he succeeded in protecting the acre or two of earth which , with his own toil , he had hewn out of the primeval forest , to be his garden ground and homestead .
No written record of this dispute is known to be in existence .
Our acquaintance with the whole subject is derived chiefly from tradition .
It would be bold , therefore , and possibly unjust , to venture a decisive opinion as to its merits ; although it appears to have been at least a matter of doubt , whether Colonel Pyncheon 's claim were not unduly stretched , in order to make it cover the small metes and bounds of Matthew Maule .
What greatly strengthens such a suspicion is the fact that this controversy between two ill-matched antagonists -- at a period , moreover , laud it as we may , when personal influence had far more weight than now -- remained for years undecided , and came to a close only with the death of the party occupying the disputed soil .
The mode of his death , too , affects the mind differently , in our day , from what it did a century and a half ago .
It was a death that blasted with strange horror the humble name of the dweller in the cottage , and made it seem almost a religious act to drive the plough over the little area of his habitation , and obliterate his place and memory from among men .
Old Matthew Maule , in a word , was executed for the crime of witchcraft .
He was one of the martyrs to that terrible delusion , which should teach us , among its other morals , that the influential classes , and those who take upon themselves to be leaders of the people , are fully liable to all the passionate error that has ever characterized the maddest mob .
Clergymen , judges , statesmen , -- the wisest , calmest , holiest persons of their day stood in the inner circle round about the gallows , loudest to applaud the work of blood , latest to confess themselves miserably deceived .
If any one part of their proceedings can be said to deserve less blame than another , it was the singular indiscrimination with which they persecuted , not merely the poor and aged , as in former judicial massacres , but people of all ranks ; their own equals , brethren , and wives .
Amid the disorder of such various ruin , it is not strange that a man of inconsiderable note , like Maule , should have trodden the martyr 's path to the hill of execution almost unremarked in the throng of his fellow sufferers .
But , in after days , when the frenzy of that hideous epoch had subsided , it was remembered how loudly Colonel Pyncheon had joined in the general cry , to purge the land from witchcraft ; nor did it fail to be whispered , that there was an invidious acrimony in the zeal with which he had sought the condemnation of Matthew Maule .
It was well known that the victim had recognized the bitterness of personal enmity in his persecutor 's conduct towards him , and that he declared himself hunted to death for his spoil .
At the moment of execution -- with the halter about his neck , and while Colonel Pyncheon sat on horseback , grimly gazing at the scene Maule had addressed him from the scaffold , and uttered a prophecy , of which history , as well as fireside tradition , has preserved the very words .
" God , " said the dying man , pointing his finger , with a ghastly look , at the undismayed countenance of his enemy , -- " God will give him blood to drink ! "
After the reputed wizard 's death , his humble homestead had fallen an easy spoil into Colonel Pyncheon 's grasp .
When it was understood , however , that the Colonel intended to erect a family mansion-spacious , ponderously framed of oaken timber , and calculated to endure for many generations of his posterity over the spot first covered by the log-built hut of Matthew Maule , there was much shaking of the head among the village gossips .
Without absolutely expressing a doubt whether the stalwart Puritan had acted as a man of conscience and integrity throughout the proceedings which have been sketched , they , nevertheless , hinted that he was about to build his house over an unquiet grave .
His home would include the home of the dead and buried wizard , and would thus afford the ghost of the latter a kind of privilege to haunt its new apartments , and the chambers into which future bridegrooms were to lead their brides , and where children of the Pyncheon blood were to be born .
The terror and ugliness of Maule 's crime , and the wretchedness of his punishment , would darken the freshly plastered walls , and infect them early with the scent of an old and melancholy house .
Why , then , -- while so much of the soil around him was bestrewn with the virgin forest leaves , -- why should Colonel Pyncheon prefer a site that had already been accurst ?
But the Puritan soldier and magistrate was not a man to be turned aside from his well-considered scheme , either by dread of the wizard 's ghost , or by flimsy sentimentalities of any kind , however specious .
Had he been told of a bad air , it might have moved him somewhat ; but he was ready to encounter an evil spirit on his own ground .
Endowed with commonsense , as massive and hard as blocks of granite , fastened together by stern rigidity of purpose , as with iron clamps , he followed out his original design , probably without so much as imagining an objection to it .
On the score of delicacy , or any scrupulousness which a finer sensibility might have taught him , the Colonel , like most of his breed and generation , was impenetrable .
He therefore dug his cellar , and laid the deep foundations of his mansion , on the square of earth whence Matthew Maule , forty years before , had first swept away the fallen leaves .
It was a curious , and , as some people thought , an ominous fact , that , very soon after the workmen began their operations , the spring of water , above mentioned , entirely lost the deliciousness of its pristine quality .
Whether its sources were disturbed by the depth of the new cellar , or whatever subtler cause might lurk at the bottom , it is certain that the water of Maule 's Well , as it continued to be called , grew hard and brackish .
Even such we find it now ; and any old woman of the neighborhood will certify that it is productive of intestinal mischief to those who quench their thirst there .
The reader may deem it singular that the head carpenter of the new edifice was no other than the son of the very man from whose dead gripe the property of the soil had been wrested .
Not improbably he was the best workman of his time ; or , perhaps , the Colonel thought it expedient , or was impelled by some better feeling , thus openly to cast aside all animosity against the race of his fallen antagonist .
Nor was it out of keeping with the general coarseness and matter-of-fact character of the age , that the son should be willing to earn an honest penny , or , rather , a weighty amount of sterling pounds , from the purse of his father 's deadly enemy .
At all events , Thomas Maule became the architect of the House of the Seven Gables , and performed his duty so faithfully that the timber framework fastened by his hands still holds together .
Chapter I Out to Sea I had this story from one who had no business to tell it to me , or to any other .
I may credit the seductive influence of an old vintage upon the narrator for the beginning of it , and my own skeptical incredulity during the days that followed for the balance of the strange tale .
When my convivial host discovered that he had told me so much , and that I was prone to doubtfulness , his foolish pride assumed the task the old vintage had commenced , and so he unearthed written evidence in the form of musty manuscript , and dry official records of the British Colonial Office to support many of the salient features of his remarkable narrative .
I do not say the story is true , for I did not witness the happenings which it portrays , but the fact that in the telling of it to you I have taken fictitious names for the principal characters quite sufficiently evidences the sincerity of my own belief that it MAY be true .
The yellow , mildewed pages of the diary of a man long dead , and the records of the Colonial Office dovetail perfectly with the narrative of my convivial host , and so I give you the story as I painstakingly pieced it out from these several various agencies .
If you do not find it credible you will at least be as one with me in acknowledging that it is unique , remarkable , and interesting .
From the records of the Colonial Office and from the dead man 's diary we learn that a certain young English nobleman , whom we shall call John Clayton , Lord Greystoke , was commissioned to make a peculiarly delicate investigation of conditions in a British West Coast African Colony from whose simple native inhabitants another European power was known to be recruiting soldiers for its native army , which it used solely for the forcible collection of rubber and ivory from the savage tribes along the Congo and the Aruwimi .
The natives of the British Colony complained that many of their young men were enticed away through the medium of fair and glowing promises , but that few if any ever returned to their families .
The Englishmen in Africa went even further , saying that these poor blacks were held in virtual slavery , since after their terms of enlistment expired their ignorance was imposed upon by their white officers , and they were told that they had yet several years to serve .
And so the Colonial Office appointed John Clayton to a new post in British West Africa , but his confidential instructions centered on a thorough investigation of the unfair treatment of black British subjects by the officers of a friendly European power .
Why he was sent , is , however , of little moment to this story , for he never made an investigation , nor , in fact , did he ever reach his destination .
Clayton was the type of Englishman that one likes best to associate with the noblest monuments of historic achievement upon a thousand victorious battlefields -- a strong , virile man -- mentally , morally , and physically .
In stature he was above the average height ; his eyes were gray , his features regular and strong ; his carriage that of perfect , robust health influenced by his years of army training .
Political ambition had caused him to seek transference from the army to the Colonial Office and so we find him , still young , entrusted with a delicate and important commission in the service of the Queen .
When he received this appointment he was both elated and appalled .
The preferment seemed to him in the nature of a well-merited reward for painstaking and intelligent service , and as a stepping stone to posts of greater importance and responsibility ; but , on the other hand , he had been married to the Hon. Alice Rutherford for scarce a three months , and it was the thought of taking this fair young girl into the dangers and isolation of tropical Africa that appalled him .
For her sake he would have refused the appointment , but she would not have it so .
Instead she insisted that he accept , and , indeed , take her with him .
There were mothers and brothers and sisters , and aunts and cousins to express various opinions on the subject , but as to what they severally advised history is silent .
We know only that on a bright May morning in 1888 , John , Lord Greystoke , and Lady Alice sailed from Dover on their way to Africa .
A month later they arrived at Freetown where they chartered a small sailing vessel , the Fuwalda , which was to bear them to their final destination .
And here John , Lord Greystoke , and Lady Alice , his wife , vanished from the eyes and from the knowledge of men .
Two months after they weighed anchor and cleared from the port of Freetown a half dozen British war vessels were scouring the south Atlantic for trace of them or their little vessel , and it was almost immediately that the wreckage was found upon the shores of St. Helena which convinced the world that the Fuwalda had gone down with all on board , and hence the search was stopped ere it had scarce begun ; though hope lingered in longing hearts for many years .
The Fuwalda , a barkentine of about one hundred tons , was a vessel of the type often seen in coastwise trade in the far southern Atlantic , their crews composed of the offscourings of the sea -- unhanged murderers and cutthroats of every race and every nation .
The Fuwalda was no exception to the rule .
Her officers were swarthy bullies , hating and hated by their crew .
The captain , while a competent seaman , was a brute in his treatment of his men .
He knew , or at least he used , but two arguments in his dealings with them -- a belaying pin and a revolver -- nor is it likely that the motley aggregation he signed would have understood aught else .
So it was that from the second day out from Freetown John Clayton and his young wife witnessed scenes upon the deck of the Fuwalda such as they had believed were never enacted outside the covers of printed stories of the sea .
It was on the morning of the second day that the first link was forged in what was destined to form a chain of circumstances ending in a life for one then unborn such as has never been paralleled in the history of man .
Two sailors were washing down the decks of the Fuwalda , the first mate was on duty , and the captain had stopped to speak with John Clayton and Lady Alice .
The men were working backwards toward the little party who were facing away from the sailors .
Closer and closer they came , until one of them was directly behind the captain .
In another moment he would have passed by and this strange narrative would never have been recorded .
But just that instant the officer turned to leave Lord and Lady Greystoke , and , as he did so , tripped against the sailor and sprawled headlong upon the deck , overturning the water-pail so that he was drenched in its dirty contents .
For an instant the scene was ludicrous ; but only for an instant .
With a volley of awful oaths , his face suffused with the scarlet of mortification and rage , the captain regained his feet , and with a terrific blow felled the sailor to the deck .
The man was small and rather old , so that the brutality of the act was thus accentuated .
The other seaman , however , was neither old nor small -- a huge bear of a man , with fierce black mustachios , and a great bull neck set between massive shoulders .
As he saw his mate go down he crouched , and , with a low snarl , sprang upon the captain crushing him to his knees with a single mighty blow .
From scarlet the officer 's face went white , for this was mutiny ; and mutiny he had met and subdued before in his brutal career .
Without waiting to rise he whipped a revolver from his pocket , firing point blank at the great mountain of muscle towering before him ; but , quick as he was , John Clayton was almost as quick , so that the bullet which was intended for the sailor 's heart lodged in the sailor 's leg instead , for Lord Greystoke had struck down the captain 's arm as he had seen the weapon flash in the sun .
Words passed between Clayton and the captain , the former making it plain that he was disgusted with the brutality displayed toward the crew , nor would he countenance anything further of the kind while he and Lady Greystoke remained passengers .
The captain was on the point of making an angry reply , but , thinking better of it , turned on his heel and black and scowling , strode aft .
He did not care to antagonize an English official , for the Queen 's mighty arm wielded a punitive instrument which he could appreciate , and which he feared -- England 's far-reaching navy .
The two sailors picked themselves up , the older man assisting his wounded comrade to rise .
The big fellow , who was known among his mates as Black Michael , tried his leg gingerly , and , finding that it bore his weight , turned to Clayton with a word of gruff thanks .
Though the fellow 's tone was surly , his words were evidently well meant .
Ere he had scarce finished his little speech he had turned and was limping off toward the forecastle with the very apparent intention of forestalling any further conversation .
They did not see him again for several days , nor did the captain accord them more than the surliest of grunts when he was forced to speak to them .
They took their meals in his cabin , as they had before the unfortunate occurrence ; but the captain was careful to see that his duties never permitted him to eat at the same time .
The other officers were coarse , illiterate fellows , but little above the villainous crew they bullied , and were only too glad to avoid social intercourse with the polished English noble and his lady , so that the Claytons were left very much to themselves .
This in itself accorded perfectly with their desires , but it also rather isolated them from the life of the little ship so that they were unable to keep in touch with the daily happenings which were to culminate so soon in bloody tragedy .
There was in the whole atmosphere of the craft that undefinable something which presages disaster .
Outwardly , to the knowledge of the Claytons , all went on as before upon the little vessel ; but that there was an undertow leading them toward some unknown danger both felt , though they did not speak of it to each other .
On the second day after the wounding of Black Michael , Clayton came on deck just in time to see the limp body of one of the crew being carried below by four of his fellows while the first mate , a heavy belaying pin in his hand , stood glowering at the little party of sullen sailors .
BOOK ONE -- The Romantic Egotist CHAPTER 1 .
Amory , Son of Beatrice Amory Blaine inherited from his mother every trait , except the stray inexpressible few , that made him worth while .
His father , an ineffectual , inarticulate man with a taste for Byron and a habit of drowsing over the Encyclopedia Britannica , grew wealthy at thirty through the death of two elder brothers , successful Chicago brokers , and in the first flush of feeling that the world was his , went to Bar Harbor and met Beatrice O'Hara .
In consequence , Stephen Blaine handed down to posterity his height of just under six feet and his tendency to waver at crucial moments , these two abstractions appearing in his son Amory .
For many years he hovered in the background of his family 's life , an unassertive figure with a face half-obliterated by lifeless , silky hair , continually occupied in “ taking care ” of his wife , continually harassed by the idea that he did n't and could n't understand her .
But Beatrice Blaine !
There was a woman !
Early pictures taken on her father 's estate at Lake Geneva , Wisconsin , or in Rome at the Sacred Heart Convent -- an educational extravagance that in her youth was only for the daughters of the exceptionally wealthy -- showed the exquisite delicacy of her features , the consummate art and simplicity of her clothes .
A brilliant education she had -- her youth passed in renaissance glory , she was versed in the latest gossip of the Older Roman Families ; known by name as a fabulously wealthy American girl to Cardinal Vitori and Queen Margherita and more subtle celebrities that one must have had some culture even to have heard of .
She learned in England to prefer whiskey and soda to wine , and her small talk was broadened in two senses during a winter in Vienna .
All in all Beatrice O'Hara absorbed the sort of education that will be quite impossible ever again ; a tutelage measured by the number of things and people one could be contemptuous of and charming about ; a culture rich in all arts and traditions , barren of all ideas , in the last of those days when the great gardener clipped the inferior roses to produce one perfect bud .
In her less important moments she returned to America , met Stephen Blaine and married him -- this almost entirely because she was a little bit weary , a little bit sad .
Her only child was carried through a tiresome season and brought into the world on a spring day in ninety-six .
When Amory was five he was already a delightful companion for her .
He was an auburn-haired boy , with great , handsome eyes which he would grow up to in time , a facile imaginative mind and a taste for fancy dress .
From his fourth to his tenth year he did the country with his mother in her father 's private car , from Coronado , where his mother became so bored that she had a nervous breakdown in a fashionable hotel , down to Mexico City , where she took a mild , almost epidemic consumption .
This trouble pleased her , and later she made use of it as an intrinsic part of her atmosphere -- especially after several astounding bracers .
So , while more or less fortunate little rich boys were defying governesses on the beach at Newport , or being spanked or tutored or read to from “ Do and Dare , ” or “ Frank on the Mississippi , ” Amory was biting acquiescent bell-boys in the Waldorf , outgrowing a natural repugnance to chamber music and symphonies , and deriving a highly specialized education from his mother .
“ Amory . ”
“ Yes , Beatrice . ”
( Such a quaint name for his mother ; she encouraged it . )
“ Dear , do n't _ think _ of getting out of bed yet .
I 've always suspected that early rising in early life makes one nervous .
Clothilde is having your breakfast brought up . ”
“ All right . ”
“ I am feeling very old to-day , Amory , ” she would sigh , her face a rare cameo of pathos , her voice exquisitely modulated , her hands as facile as Bernhardt 's .
“ My nerves are on edge -- on edge .
We must leave this terrifying place to-morrow and go searching for sunshine . ”
Amory 's penetrating green eyes would look out through tangled hair at his mother .
Even at this age he had no illusions about her .
“ Amory . ”
“ Oh , _ yes _ . ”
“ I want you to take a red-hot bath as hot as you can bear it , and just relax your nerves .
You can read in the tub if you wish . ”
She fed him sections of the “ Fetes Galantes ” before he was ten ; at eleven he could talk glibly , if rather reminiscently , of Brahms and Mozart and Beethoven .
One afternoon , when left alone in the hotel at Hot Springs , he sampled his mother 's apricot cordial , and as the taste pleased him , he became quite tipsy .
This was fun for a while , but he essayed a cigarette in his exaltation , and succumbed to a vulgar , plebeian reaction .
Though this incident horrified Beatrice , it also secretly amused her and became part of what in a later generation would have been termed her “ line . ”
“ This son of mine , ” he heard her tell a room full of awestruck , admiring women one day , “ is entirely sophisticated and quite charming -- but delicate -- we 're all delicate ; _ here _ , you know . ”
Her hand was radiantly outlined against her beautiful bosom ; then sinking her voice to a whisper , she told them of the apricot cordial .
They rejoiced , for she was a brave raconteuse , but many were the keys turned in sideboard locks that night against the possible defection of little Bobby or Barbara ... .
These domestic pilgrimages were invariably in state ; two maids , the private car , or Mr. Blaine when available , and very often a physician .
When Amory had the whooping-cough four disgusted specialists glared at each other hunched around his bed ; when he took scarlet fever the number of attendants , including physicians and nurses , totalled fourteen .
However , blood being thicker than broth , he was pulled through .
The Blaines were attached to no city .
They were the Blaines of Lake Geneva ; they had quite enough relatives to serve in place of friends , and an enviable standing from Pasadena to Cape Cod .
But Beatrice grew more and more prone to like only new acquaintances , as there were certain stories , such as the history of her constitution and its many amendments , memories of her years abroad , that it was necessary for her to repeat at regular intervals .
Like Freudian dreams , they must be thrown off , else they would sweep in and lay siege to her nerves .
But Beatrice was critical about American women , especially the floating population of ex-Westerners .
“ They have accents , my dear , ” she told Amory , “ not Southern accents or Boston accents , not an accent attached to any locality , just an accent ” -- she became dreamy .
“ They pick up old , moth-eaten London accents that are down on their luck and have to be used by some one .
They talk as an English butler might after several years in a Chicago grand-opera company . ”
She became almost incoherent -- “ Suppose -- time in every Western woman 's life -- she feels her husband is prosperous enough for her to have -- accent -- they try to impress _ me _ , my dear -- ” Though she thought of her body as a mass of frailties , she considered her soul quite as ill , and therefore important in her life .
She had once been a Catholic , but discovering that priests were infinitely more attentive when she was in process of losing or regaining faith in Mother Church , she maintained an enchantingly wavering attitude .
Often she deplored the bourgeois quality of the American Catholic clergy , and was quite sure that had she lived in the shadow of the great Continental cathedrals her soul would still be a thin flame on the mighty altar of Rome .
Still , next to doctors , priests were her favorite sport .
“ Ah , Bishop Wiston , ” she would declare , “ I do not want to talk of myself .
I can imagine the stream of hysterical women fluttering at your doors , beseeching you to be simpatico ” -- then after an interlude filled by the clergyman -- “ but my mood -- is -- oddly dissimilar . ”
Only to bishops and above did she divulge her clerical romance .
When she had first returned to her country there had been a pagan , Swinburnian young man in Asheville , for whose passionate kisses and unsentimental conversations she had taken a decided penchant -- they had discussed the matter pro and con with an intellectual romancing quite devoid of sappiness .
Eventually she had decided to marry for background , and the young pagan from Asheville had gone through a spiritual crisis , joined the Catholic Church , and was now -- Monsignor Darcy .
“ Indeed , Mrs. Blaine , he is still delightful company -- quite the cardinal 's right-hand man . ”
“ Amory will go to him one day , I know , ” breathed the beautiful lady , “ and Monsignor Darcy will understand him as he understood me . ”
Amory became thirteen , rather tall and slender , and more than ever on to his Celtic mother .
He had tutored occasionally -- the idea being that he was to “ keep up , ” at each place “ taking up the work where he left off , ” yet as no tutor ever found the place he left off , his mind was still in very good shape .
What a few more years of this life would have made of him is problematical .
However , four hours out from land , Italy bound , with Beatrice , his appendix burst , probably from too many meals in bed , and after a series of frantic telegrams to Europe and America , to the amazement of the passengers the great ship slowly wheeled around and returned to New York to deposit Amory at the pier .
You will admit that if it was not life it was magnificent .
After the operation Beatrice had a nervous breakdown that bore a suspicious resemblance to delirium tremens , and Amory was left in Minneapolis , destined to spend the ensuing two years with his aunt and uncle .
There the crude , vulgar air of Western civilization first catches him -- in his underwear , so to speak .
***** A KISS FOR AMORY His lip curled when he read it .
“ I am going to have a bobbing party , ” it said , “ on Thursday , December the seventeenth , at five o'clock , and I would like it very much if you could come .
Yours truly ,
PART I .
A VOYAGE TO LILLIPUT .
CHAPTER I .
The author gives some account of himself and family .
His first inducements to travel .
He is shipwrecked , and swims for his life .
Gets safe on shore in the country of Lilliput ; is made a prisoner , and carried up the country .
My father had a small estate in Nottinghamshire : I was the third of five sons .
He sent me to Emanuel College in Cambridge at fourteen years old , where I resided three years , and applied myself close to my studies ; but the charge of maintaining me , although I had a very scanty allowance , being too great for a narrow fortune , I was bound apprentice to Mr. James Bates , an eminent surgeon in London , with whom I continued four years .
My father now and then sending me small sums of money , I laid them out in learning navigation , and other parts of the mathematics , useful to those who intend to travel , as I always believed it would be , some time or other , my fortune to do .
When I left Mr. Bates , I went down to my father : where , by the assistance of him and my uncle John , and some other relations , I got forty pounds , and a promise of thirty pounds a year to maintain me at Leyden : there I studied physic two years and seven months , knowing it would be useful in long voyages .
Soon after my return from Leyden , I was recommended by my good master , Mr. Bates , to be surgeon to the Swallow , Captain Abraham Pannel , commander ; with whom I continued three years and a half , making a voyage or two into the Levant , and some other parts .
When I came back I resolved to settle in London ; to which Mr. Bates , my master , encouraged me , and by him I was recommended to several patients .
I took part of a small house in the Old Jewry ; and being advised to alter my condition , I married Mrs. Mary Burton , second daughter to Mr. Edmund Burton , hosier , in Newgate-street , with whom I received four hundred pounds for a portion .
But my good master Bates dying in two years after , and I having few friends , my business began to fail ; for my conscience would not suffer me to imitate the bad practice of too many among my brethren .
Having therefore consulted with my wife , and some of my acquaintance , I determined to go again to sea .
I was surgeon successively in two ships , and made several voyages , for six years , to the East and West Indies , by which I got some addition to my fortune .
My hours of leisure I spent in reading the best authors , ancient and modern , being always provided with a good number of books ; and when I was ashore , in observing the manners and dispositions of the people , as well as learning their language ; wherein I had a great facility , by the strength of my memory .
The last of these voyages not proving very fortunate , I grew weary of the sea , and intended to stay at home with my wife and family .
I removed from the Old Jewry to Fetter Lane , and from thence to Wapping , hoping to get business among the sailors ; but it would not turn to account .
After three years expectation that things would mend , I accepted an advantageous offer from Captain William Prichard , master of the Antelope , who was making a voyage to the South Sea .
We set sail from Bristol , May 4 , 1699 , and our voyage was at first very prosperous .
It would not be proper , for some reasons , to trouble the reader with the particulars of our adventures in those seas ; let it suffice to inform him , that in our passage from thence to the East Indies , we were driven by a violent storm to the north-west of Van Diemen ’s Land .
By an observation , we found ourselves in the latitude of 30 degrees 2 minutes south .
Twelve of our crew were dead by immoderate labour and ill food ; the rest were in a very weak condition .
On the 5th of November , which was the beginning of summer in those parts , the weather being very hazy , the seamen spied a rock within half a cable ’s length of the ship ; but the wind was so strong , that we were driven directly upon it , and immediately split .
Six of the crew , of whom I was one , having let down the boat into the sea , made a shift to get clear of the ship and the rock .
We rowed , by my computation , about three leagues , till we were able to work no longer , being already spent with labour while we were in the ship .
We therefore trusted ourselves to the mercy of the waves , and in about half an hour the boat was overset by a sudden flurry from the north .
What became of my companions in the boat , as well as of those who escaped on the rock , or were left in the vessel , I can not tell ; but conclude they were all lost .
For my own part , I swam as fortune directed me , and was pushed forward by wind and tide .
I often let my legs drop , and could feel no bottom ; but when I was almost gone , and able to struggle no longer , I found myself within my depth ; and by this time the storm was much abated .
The declivity was so small , that I walked near a mile before I got to the shore , which I conjectured was about eight o’clock in the evening .
I then advanced forward near half a mile , but could not discover any sign of houses or inhabitants ; at least I was in so weak a condition , that I did not observe them .
I was extremely tired , and with that , and the heat of the weather , and about half a pint of brandy that I drank as I left the ship , I found myself much inclined to sleep .
I lay down on the grass , which was very short and soft , where I slept sounder than ever I remembered to have done in my life , and , as I reckoned , about nine hours ; for when I awaked , it was just day-light .
I attempted to rise , but was not able to stir : for , as I happened to lie on my back , I found my arms and legs were strongly fastened on each side to the ground ; and my hair , which was long and thick , tied down in the same manner .
I likewise felt several slender ligatures across my body , from my arm-pits to my thighs .
I could only look upwards ; the sun began to grow hot , and the light offended my eyes .
I heard a confused noise about me ; but in the posture I lay , could see nothing except the sky .
In a little time I felt something alive moving on my left leg , which advancing gently forward over my breast , came almost up to my chin ; when , bending my eyes downwards as much as I could , I perceived it to be a human creature not six inches high , with a bow and arrow in his hands , and a quiver at his back .
In the mean time , I felt at least forty more of the same kind ( as I conjectured ) following the first .
I was in the utmost astonishment , and roared so loud , that they all ran back in a fright ; and some of them , as I was afterwards told , were hurt with the falls they got by leaping from my sides upon the ground .
However , they soon returned , and one of them , who ventured so far as to get a full sight of my face , lifting up his hands and eyes by way of admiration , cried out in a shrill but distinct voice , _ Hekinah degul _ : the others repeated the same words several times , but then I knew not what they meant .
I lay all this while , as the reader may believe , in great uneasiness .
At length , struggling to get loose , I had the fortune to break the strings , and wrench out the pegs that fastened my left arm to the ground ; for , by lifting it up to my face , I discovered the methods they had taken to bind me , and at the same time with a violent pull , which gave me excessive pain , I a little loosened the strings that tied down my hair on the left side , so that I was just able to turn my head about two inches .
But the creatures ran off a second time , before I could seize them ; whereupon there was a great shout in a very shrill accent , and after it ceased I heard one of them cry aloud _ Tolgo phonac _ ; when in an instant I felt above a hundred arrows discharged on my left hand , which , pricked me like so many needles ; and besides , they shot another flight into the air , as we do bombs in Europe , whereof many , I suppose , fell on my body , ( though I felt them not ) , and some on my face , which I immediately covered with my left hand .
When this shower of arrows was over , I fell a groaning with grief and pain ; and then striving again to get loose , they discharged another volley larger than the first , and some of them attempted with spears to stick me in the sides ; but by good luck I had on a buff jerkin , which they could not pierce .
I thought it the most prudent method to lie still , and my design was to continue so till night , when , my left hand being already loose , I could easily free myself : and as for the inhabitants , I had reason to believe I might be a match for the greatest army they could bring against me , if they were all of the same size with him that I saw .
But fortune disposed otherwise of me .
When the people observed I was quiet , they discharged no more arrows ; but , by the noise I heard , I knew their numbers increased ; and about four yards from me , over against my right ear , I heard a knocking for above an hour , like that of people at work ; when turning my head that way , as well as the pegs and strings would permit me , I saw a stage erected about a foot and a half from the ground , capable of holding four of the inhabitants , with two or three ladders to mount it : from whence one of them , who seemed to be a person of quality , made me a long speech , whereof I understood not one syllable .
But I should have mentioned , that before the principal person began his oration , he cried out three times , _ Langro dehul san _ ( these words and the former were afterwards repeated and explained to me ) ; whereupon , immediately , about fifty of the inhabitants came and cut the strings that fastened the left side of my head , which gave me the liberty of turning it to the right , and of observing the person and gesture of him that was to speak .
He appeared to be of a middle age , and taller than any of the other three who attended him , whereof one was a page that held up his train , and seemed to be somewhat longer than my middle finger ; the other two stood one on each side to support him .
He acted every part of an orator , and I could observe many periods of threatenings , and others of promises , pity , and kindness .
I answered in a few words , but in the most submissive manner , lifting up my left hand , and both my eyes to the sun , as calling him for a witness ; and being almost famished with hunger , having not eaten a morsel for some hours before I left the ship , I found the demands of nature so strong upon me , that I could not forbear showing my impatience ( perhaps against the strict rules of decency ) by putting my finger frequently to my mouth , to signify that I wanted food .
The _ hurgo _ ( for so they call a great lord , as I afterwards learnt ) understood me very well .
He descended from the stage , and commanded that several ladders should be applied to my sides , on which above a hundred of the inhabitants mounted and walked towards my mouth , laden with baskets full of meat , which had been provided and sent thither by the king ’s orders , upon the first intelligence he received of me .
I observed there was the flesh of several animals , but could not distinguish them by the taste .
There were shoulders , legs , and loins , shaped like those of mutton , and very well dressed , but smaller than the wings of a lark .
I ate them by two or three at a mouthful , and took three loaves at a time , about the bigness of musket bullets .
They supplied me as fast as they could , showing a thousand marks of wonder and astonishment at my bulk and appetite .
I then made another sign , that I wanted drink .
They found by my eating that a small quantity would not suffice me ; and being a most ingenious people , they slung up , with great dexterity , one of their largest hogsheads , then rolled it towards my hand , and beat out the top ; I drank it off at a draught , which I might well do , for it did not hold half a pint , and tasted like a small wine of Burgundy , but much more delicious .
They brought me a second hogshead , which I drank in the same manner , and made signs for more ; but they had none to give me .
When I had performed these wonders , they shouted for joy , and danced upon my breast , repeating several times as they did at first , _ Hekinah degul _ .
They made me a sign that I should throw down the two hogsheads , but first warning the people below to stand out of the way , crying aloud , _ Borach mevolah _ ; and when they saw the vessels in the air , there was a universal shout of _ Hekinah degul _ .
I confess I was often tempted , while they were passing backwards and forwards on my body , to seize forty or fifty of the first that came in my reach , and dash them against the ground .
But the remembrance of what I had felt , which probably might not be the worst they could do , and the promise of honour I made them — for so I interpreted my submissive behaviour — soon drove out these imaginations .
Besides , I now considered myself as bound by the laws of hospitality , to a people who had treated me with so much expense and magnificence .
However , in my thoughts I could not sufficiently wonder at the intrepidity of these diminutive mortals , who durst venture to mount and walk upon my body , while one of my hands was at liberty , without trembling at the very sight of so prodigious a creature as I must appear to them .
After some time , when they observed that I made no more demands for meat , there appeared before me a person of high rank from his imperial majesty .
His excellency , having mounted on the small of my right leg , advanced forwards up to my face , with about a dozen of his retinue ; and producing his credentials under the signet royal , which he applied close to my eyes , spoke about ten minutes without any signs of anger , but with a kind of determinate resolution , often pointing forwards , which , as I afterwards found , was towards the capital city , about half a mile distant ; whither it was agreed by his majesty in council that I must be conveyed .
I answered in few words , but to no purpose , and made a sign with my hand that was loose , putting it to the other ( but over his excellency ’s head for fear of hurting him or his train ) and then to my own head and body , to signify that I desired my liberty .
It appeared that he understood me well enough , for he shook his head by way of disapprobation , and held his hand in a posture to show that I must be carried as a prisoner .
However , he made other signs to let me understand that I should have meat and drink enough , and very good treatment .
Whereupon I once more thought of attempting to break my bonds ; but again , when I felt the smart of their arrows upon my face and hands , which were all in blisters , and many of the darts still sticking in them , and observing likewise that the number of my enemies increased , I gave tokens to let them know that they might do with me what they pleased .
Upon this , the _ hurgo _ and his train withdrew , with much civility and cheerful countenances .
Soon after I heard a general shout , with frequent repetitions of the words _ Peplom selan _ ; and I felt great numbers of people on my left side relaxing the cords to such a degree , that I was able to turn upon my right , and to ease myself with making water ; which I very plentifully did , to the great astonishment of the people ; who , conjecturing by my motion what I was going to do , immediately opened to the right and left on that side , to avoid the torrent , which fell with such noise and violence from me .
But before this , they had daubed my face and both my hands with a sort of ointment , very pleasant to the smell , which , in a few minutes , removed all the smart of their arrows .
These circumstances , added to the refreshment I had received by their victuals and drink , which were very nourishing , disposed me to sleep .
I slept about eight hours , as I was afterwards assured ; and it was no wonder , for the physicians , by the emperor ’s order , had mingled a sleepy potion in the hogsheads of wine .
Letter 1 St. Petersburgh , Dec. 11th , 17 -- TO Mrs. Saville , England You will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil forebodings .
I arrived here yesterday , and my first task is to assure my dear sister of my welfare and increasing confidence in the success of my undertaking .
I am already far north of London , and as I walk in the streets of Petersburgh , I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks , which braces my nerves and fills me with delight .
Do you understand this feeling ?
This breeze , which has travelled from the regions towards which I am advancing , gives me a foretaste of those icy climes .
Inspirited by this wind of promise , my daydreams become more fervent and vivid .
I try in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and desolation ; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the region of beauty and delight .
There , Margaret , the sun is forever visible , its broad disk just skirting the horizon and diffusing a perpetual splendour .
There -- for with your leave , my sister , I will put some trust in preceding navigators -- there snow and frost are banished ; and , sailing over a calm sea , we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe .
Its productions and features may be without example , as the phenomena of the heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes .
What may not be expected in a country of eternal light ?
I may there discover the wondrous power which attracts the needle and may regulate a thousand celestial observations that require only this voyage to render their seeming eccentricities consistent forever .
I shall satiate my ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world never before visited , and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man .
These are my enticements , and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of danger or death and to induce me to commence this laborious voyage with the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little boat , with his holiday mates , on an expedition of discovery up his native river .
But supposing all these conjectures to be false , you can not contest the inestimable benefit which I shall confer on all mankind , to the last generation , by discovering a passage near the pole to those countries , to reach which at present so many months are requisite ; or by ascertaining the secret of the magnet , which , if at all possible , can only be effected by an undertaking such as mine .
These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which I began my letter , and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me to heaven , for nothing contributes so much to tranquillize the mind as a steady purpose -- a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye .
This expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years .
I have read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have been made in the prospect of arriving at the North Pacific Ocean through the seas which surround the pole .
You may remember that a history of all the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of our good Uncle Thomas ' library .
My education was neglected , yet I was passionately fond of reading .
These volumes were my study day and night , and my familiarity with them increased that regret which I had felt , as a child , on learning that my father 's dying injunction had forbidden my uncle to allow me to embark in a seafaring life .
These visions faded when I perused , for the first time , those poets whose effusions entranced my soul and lifted it to heaven .
I also became a poet and for one year lived in a paradise of my own creation ; I imagined that I also might obtain a niche in the temple where the names of Homer and Shakespeare are consecrated .
You are well acquainted with my failure and how heavily I bore the disappointment .
But just at that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin , and my thoughts were turned into the channel of their earlier bent .
Six years have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking .
I can , even now , remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great enterprise .
I commenced by inuring my body to hardship .
I accompanied the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea ; I voluntarily endured cold , famine , thirst , and want of sleep ; I often worked harder than the common sailors during the day and devoted my nights to the study of mathematics , the theory of medicine , and those branches of physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest practical advantage .
Twice I actually hired myself as an under-mate in a Greenland whaler , and acquitted myself to admiration .
I must own I felt a little proud when my captain offered me the second dignity in the vessel and entreated me to remain with the greatest earnestness , so valuable did he consider my services .
And now , dear Margaret , do I not deserve to accomplish some great purpose ?
My life might have been passed in ease and luxury , but I preferred glory to every enticement that wealth placed in my path .
Oh , that some encouraging voice would answer in the affirmative !
My courage and my resolution is firm ; but my hopes fluctuate , and my spirits are often depressed .
I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage , the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude : I am required not only to raise the spirits of others , but sometimes to sustain my own , when theirs are failing .
This is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia .
They fly quickly over the snow in their sledges ; the motion is pleasant , and , in my opinion , far more agreeable than that of an English stagecoach .
The cold is not excessive , if you are wrapped in furs -- a dress which I have already adopted , for there is a great difference between walking the deck and remaining seated motionless for hours , when no exercise prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins .
I have no ambition to lose my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and Archangel .
I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks ; and my intention is to hire a ship there , which can easily be done by paying the insurance for the owner , and to engage as many sailors as I think necessary among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing .
I do not intend to sail until the month of June ; and when shall I return ?
Ah , dear sister , how can I answer this question ?
If I succeed , many , many months , perhaps years , will pass before you and I may meet .
If I fail , you will see me again soon , or never .
Farewell , my dear , excellent Margaret .
Heaven shower down blessings on you , and save me , that I may again and again testify my gratitude for all your love and kindness .
Your affectionate brother , R. Walton Letter 2 Archangel , 28th March , 17 -- To Mrs. Saville , England How slowly the time passes here , encompassed as I am by frost and snow !
Yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise .
I have hired a vessel and am occupied in collecting my sailors ; those whom I have already engaged appear to be men on whom I can depend and are certainly possessed of dauntless courage .
But I have one want which I have never yet been able to satisfy , and the absence of the object of which I now feel as a most severe evil , I have no friend , Margaret : when I am glowing with the enthusiasm of success , there will be none to participate my joy ; if I am assailed by disappointment , no one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection .
I shall commit my thoughts to paper , it is true ; but that is a poor medium for the communication of feeling .
I desire the company of a man who could sympathize with me , whose eyes would reply to mine .
You may deem me romantic , my dear sister , but I bitterly feel the want of a friend .
I have no one near me , gentle yet courageous , possessed of a cultivated as well as of a capacious mind , whose tastes are like my own , to approve or amend my plans .
How would such a friend repair the faults of your poor brother !
I am too ardent in execution and too impatient of difficulties .
But it is a still greater evil to me that I am self-educated : for the first fourteen years of my life I ran wild on a common and read nothing but our Uncle Thomas ' books of voyages .
At that age I became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own country ; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive its most important benefits from such a conviction that I perceived the necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my native country .
Now I am twenty-eight and am in reality more illiterate than many schoolboys of fifteen .
It is true that I have thought more and that my daydreams are more extended and magnificent , but they want ( as the painters call it ) KEEPING ; and I greatly need a friend who would have sense enough not to despise me as romantic , and affection enough for me to endeavour to regulate my mind .
Well , these are useless complaints ; I shall certainly find no friend on the wide ocean , nor even here in Archangel , among merchants and seamen .
Yet some feelings , unallied to the dross of human nature , beat even in these rugged bosoms .
My lieutenant , for instance , is a man of wonderful courage and enterprise ; he is madly desirous of glory , or rather , to word my phrase more characteristically , of advancement in his profession .
He is an Englishman , and in the midst of national and professional prejudices , unsoftened by cultivation , retains some of the noblest endowments of humanity .
I first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel ; finding that he was unemployed in this city , I easily engaged him to assist in my enterprise .
The master is a person of an excellent disposition and is remarkable in the ship for his gentleness and the mildness of his discipline .
This circumstance , added to his well-known integrity and dauntless courage , made me very desirous to engage him .
A youth passed in solitude , my best years spent under your gentle and feminine fosterage , has so refined the groundwork of my character that I can not overcome an intense distaste to the usual brutality exercised on board ship : I have never believed it to be necessary , and when I heard of a mariner equally noted for his kindliness of heart and the respect and obedience paid to him by his crew , I felt myself peculiarly fortunate in being able to secure his services .
I heard of him first in rather a romantic manner , from a lady who owes to him the happiness of her life .
This , briefly , is his story .
Some years ago he loved a young Russian lady of moderate fortune , and having amassed a considerable sum in prize-money , the father of the girl consented to the match .
He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony ; but she was bathed in tears , and throwing herself at his feet , entreated him to spare her , confessing at the same time that she loved another , but that he was poor , and that her father would never consent to the union .
My generous friend reassured the suppliant , and on being informed of the name of her lover , instantly abandoned his pursuit .
He had already bought a farm with his money , on which he had designed to pass the remainder of his life ; but he bestowed the whole on his rival , together with the remains of his prize-money to purchase stock , and then himself solicited the young woman 's father to consent to her marriage with her lover .
But the old man decidedly refused , thinking himself bound in honour to my friend , who , when he found the father inexorable , quitted his country , nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married according to her inclinations .
" What a noble fellow ! "
you will exclaim .
He is so ; but then he is wholly uneducated : he is as silent as a Turk , and a kind of ignorant carelessness attends him , which , while it renders his conduct the more astonishing , detracts from the interest and sympathy which otherwise he would command .
A cloudy day : do you know what that is in a town of iron-works ?
The sky sank down before dawn , muddy , flat , immovable .
The air is thick , clammy with the breath of crowded human beings .
It stifles me .
I open the window , and , looking out , can scarcely see through the rain the grocer 's shop opposite , where a crowd of drunken Irishmen are puffing Lynchburg tobacco in their pipes .
I can detect the scent through all the foul smells ranging loose in the air .
The idiosyncrasy of this town is smoke .
It rolls sullenly in slow folds from the great chimneys of the iron-foundries , and settles down in black , slimy pools on the muddy streets .
Smoke on the wharves , smoke on the dingy boats , on the yellow river , -- clinging in a coating of greasy soot to the house-front , the two faded poplars , the faces of the passers-by .
The long train of mules , dragging masses of pig-iron through the narrow street , have a foul vapor hanging to their reeking sides .
Here , inside , is a little broken figure of an angel pointing upward from the mantel-shelf ; but even its wings are covered with smoke , clotted and black .
Smoke everywhere !
A dirty canary chirps desolately in a cage beside me .
Its dream of green fields and sunshine is a very old dream , -- almost worn out , I think .
From the back-window I can see a narrow brick-yard sloping down to the river-side , strewed with rain-butts and tubs .
The river , dull and tawny-colored , ( la belle riviere ! )
drags itself sluggishly along , tired of the heavy weight of boats and coal-barges .
What wonder ?
When I was a child , I used to fancy a look of weary , dumb appeal upon the face of the negro-like river slavishly bearing its burden day after day .
Something of the same idle notion comes to me to-day , when from the street-window I look on the slow stream of human life creeping past , night and morning , to the great mills .
Masses of men , with dull , besotted faces bent to the ground , sharpened here and there by pain or cunning ; skin and muscle and flesh begrimed with smoke and ashes ; stooping all night over boiling caldrons of metal , laired by day in dens of drunkenness and infamy ; breathing from infancy to death an air saturated with fog and grease and soot , vileness for soul and body .
What do you make of a case like that , amateur psychologist ?
You call it an altogether serious thing to be alive : to these men it is a drunken jest , a joke , -- horrible to angels perhaps , to them commonplace enough .
My fancy about the river was an idle one : it is no type of such a life .
What if it be stagnant and slimy here ?
It knows that beyond there waits for it odorous sunlight , quaint old gardens , dusky with soft , green foliage of apple-trees , and flushing crimson with roses , -- air , and fields , and mountains .
The future of the Welsh puddler passing just now is not so pleasant .
To be stowed away , after his grimy work is done , in a hole in the muddy graveyard , and after that , not air , nor green fields , nor curious roses .
Can you see how foggy the day is ?
As I stand here , idly tapping the windowpane , and looking out through the rain at the dirty back-yard and the coalboats below , fragments of an old story float up before me , -- a story of this house into which I happened to come to-day .
You may think it a tiresome story enough , as foggy as the day , sharpened by no sudden flashes of pain or pleasure .
-- I know : only the outline of a dull life , that long since , with thousands of dull lives like its own , was vainly lived and lost : thousands of them , massed , vile , slimy lives , like those of the torpid lizards in yonder stagnant water-butt .
-- Lost ?
There is a curious point for you to settle , my friend , who study psychology in a lazy , dilettante way .
Stop a moment .
I am going to be honest .
This is what I want you to do .
I want you to hide your disgust , take no heed to your clean clothes , and come right down with me , -- here , into the thickest of the fog and mud and foul effluvia .
I want you to hear this story .
There is a secret down here , in this nightmare fog , that has lain dumb for centuries : I want to make it a real thing to you .
You , Egoist , or Pantheist , or Arminian , busy in making straight paths for your feet on the hills , do not see it clearly , -- this terrible question which men here have gone mad and died trying to answer .
I dare not put this secret into words .
I told you it was dumb .
These men , going by with drunken faces and brains full of unawakened power , do not ask it of Society or of God .
Their lives ask it ; their deaths ask it .
There is no reply .
I will tell you plainly that I have a great hope ; and I bring it to you to be tested .
It is this : that this terrible dumb question is its own reply ; that it is not the sentence of death we think it , but , from the very extremity of its darkness , the most solemn prophecy which the world has known of the Hope to come .
I dare make my meaning no clearer , but will only tell my story .
It will , perhaps , seem to you as foul and dark as this thick vapor about us , and as pregnant with death ; but if your eyes are free as mine are to look deeper , no perfume-tinted dawn will be so fair with promise of the day that shall surely come .
My story is very simple , -- Only what I remember of the life of one of these men , -- a furnace-tender in one of Kirby & John 's rolling-mills , -- Hugh Wolfe .
You know the mills ?
They took the great order for the lower Virginia railroads there last winter ; run usually with about a thousand men .
I can not tell why I choose the half-forgotten story of this Wolfe more than that of myriads of these furnace-hands .
Perhaps because there is a secret , underlying sympathy between that story and this day with its impure fog and thwarted sunshine , -- or perhaps simply for the reason that this house is the one where the Wolfes lived .
There were the father and son , -- both hands , as I said , in one of Kirby & John 's mills for making railroad-iron , -- and Deborah , their cousin , a picker in some of the cotton-mills .
The house was rented then to half a dozen families .
The Wolfes had two of the cellar-rooms .
The old man , like many of the puddlers and feeders of the mills , was Welsh , -- had spent half of his life in the Cornish tin-mines .
You may pick the Welsh emigrants , Cornish miners , out of the throng passing the windows , any day .
They are a trifle more filthy ; their muscles are not so brawny ; they stoop more .
When they are drunk , they neither yell , nor shout , nor stagger , but skulk along like beaten hounds .
A pure , unmixed blood , I fancy : shows itself in the slight angular bodies and sharply-cut facial lines .
It is nearly thirty years since the Wolfes lived here .
Their lives were like those of their class : incessant labor , sleeping in kennel-like rooms , eating rank pork and molasses , drinking -- God and the distillers only know what ; with an occasional night in jail , to atone for some drunken excess .
Is that all of their lives ?
-- of the portion given to them and these their duplicates swarming the streets to-day ?
-- nothing beneath ?
-- all ?
So many a political reformer will tell you , -- and many a private reformer , too , who has gone among them with a heart tender with Christ 's charity , and come out outraged , hardened .
One rainy night , about eleven o'clock , a crowd of half-clothed women stopped outside of the cellar-door .
They were going home from the cotton-mill .
“ Good-night , Deb , ” said one , a mulatto , steadying herself against the gas-post .
She needed the post to steady her .
So did more than one of them .
“ Dah 's a ball to Miss Potts ' to-night .
Ye 'd best come . ”
“ Inteet , Deb , if hur 'll come , hur 'll hef fun , ” said a shrill Welsh voice in the crowd .
Two or three dirty hands were thrust out to catch the gown of the woman , who was groping for the latch of the door .
“ No . ”
“ No ?
Where 's Kit Small , then ? ”
“ Begorra !
on the spools .
Alleys behint , though we helped her , we dud .
An wid ye !
Let Deb alone !
It 's ondacent frettin ' a quite body .
Be the powers , an we 'll have a night of it !
there 'll be lashin 's o ' drink , -- the Vargent be blessed and praised for ' t ! ”
They went on , the mulatto inclining for a moment to show fight , and drag the woman Wolfe off with them ; but , being pacified , she staggered away .
Deborah groped her way into the cellar , and , after considerable stumbling , kindled a match , and lighted a tallow dip , that sent a yellow glimmer over the room .
It was low , damp , -- the earthen floor covered with a green , slimy moss , -- a fetid air smothering the breath .
Old Wolfe lay asleep on a heap of straw , wrapped in a torn horse-blanket .
He was a pale , meek little man , with a white face and red rabbit-eyes .
The woman Deborah was like him ; only her face was even more ghastly , her lips bluer , her eyes more watery .
She wore a faded cotton gown and a slouching bonnet .
When she walked , one could see that she was deformed , almost a hunchback .
She trod softly , so as not to waken him , and went through into the room beyond .
There she found by the half-extinguished fire an iron saucepan filled with cold boiled potatoes , which she put upon a broken chair with a pint-cup of ale .
Placing the old candlestick beside this dainty repast , she untied her bonnet , which hung limp and wet over her face , and prepared to eat her supper .
It was the first food that had touched her lips since morning .
There was enough of it , however : there is not always .
She was hungry , -- one could see that easily enough , -- and not drunk , as most of her companions would have been found at this hour .
She did not drink , this woman , -- her face told that , too , -- nothing stronger than ale .
Perhaps the weak , flaccid wretch had some stimulant in her pale life to keep her up , -- some love or hope , it might be , or urgent need .
When that stimulant was gone , she would take to whiskey .
Man can not live by work alone .
While she was skinning the potatoes , and munching them , a noise behind her made her stop .
Chapter I Major Amberson had “ made a fortune ” in 1873 , when other people were losing fortunes , and the magnificence of the Ambersons began then .
Magnificence , like the size of a fortune , is always comparative , as even Magnificent Lorenzo may now perceive , if he has happened to haunt New York in 1916 ; and the Ambersons were magnificent in their day and place .
Their splendour lasted throughout all the years that saw their Midland town spread and darken into a city , but reached its topmost during the period when every prosperous family with children kept a Newfoundland dog .
In that town , in those days , all the women who wore silk or velvet knew all the other women who wore silk or velvet , and when there was a new purchase of sealskin , sick people were got to windows to see it go by .
Trotters were out , in the winter afternoons , racing light sleighs on National Avenue and Tennessee Street ; everybody recognized both the trotters and the drivers ; and again knew them as well on summer evenings , when slim buggies whizzed by in renewals of the snow-time rivalry .
For that matter , everybody knew everybody else 's family horse-and-carriage , could identify such a silhouette half a mile down the street , and thereby was sure who was going to market , or to a reception , or coming home from office or store to noon dinner or evening supper .
During the earlier years of this period , elegance of personal appearance was believed to rest more upon the texture of garments than upon their shaping .
A silk dress needed no remodelling when it was a year or so old ; it remained distinguished by merely remaining silk .
Old men and governors wore broadcloth ; “ full dress ” was broadcloth with “ doeskin ” trousers ; and there were seen men of all ages to whom a hat meant only that rigid , tall silk thing known to impudence as a “ stove-pipe . ”
In town and country these men would wear no other hat , and , without self-consciousness , they went rowing in such hats .
Shifting fashions of shape replaced aristocracy of texture : dressmakers , shoemakers , hatmakers , and tailors , increasing in cunning and in power , found means to make new clothes old .
The long contagion of the “ Derby ” hat arrived : one season the crown of this hat would be a bucket ; the next it would be a spoon .
Every house still kept its bootjack , but high-topped boots gave way to shoes and “ congress gaiters ” ; and these were played through fashions that shaped them now with toes like box-ends and now with toes like the prows of racing shells .
Trousers with a crease were considered plebeian ; the crease proved that the garment had lain upon a shelf , and hence was “ ready-made ” ; these betraying trousers were called “ hand-me-downs , ” in allusion to the shelf .
In the early ' eighties , while bangs and bustles were having their way with women , that variation of dandy known as the “ dude ” was invented : he wore trousers as tight as stockings , dagger-pointed shoes , a spoon “ Derby , ” a single-breasted coat called a “ Chesterfield , ” with short flaring skirts , a torturing cylindrical collar , laundered to a polish and three inches high , while his other neckgear might be a heavy , puffed cravat or a tiny bow fit for a doll 's braids .
With evening dress he wore a tan overcoat so short that his black coat-tails hung visible , five inches below the over-coat ; but after a season or two he lengthened his overcoat till it touched his heels , and he passed out of his tight trousers into trousers like great bags .
Then , presently , he was seen no more , though the word that had been coined for him remained in the vocabularies of the impertinent .
It was a hairier day than this .
Beards were to the wearers ' fancy , and things as strange as the Kaiserliche boar-tusk moustache were commonplace .
“ Side-burns ” found nourishment upon childlike profiles ; great Dundreary whiskers blew like tippets over young shoulders ; moustaches were trained as lambrequins over forgotten mouths ; and it was possible for a Senator of the United States to wear a mist of white whisker upon his throat only , not a newspaper in the land finding the ornament distinguished enough to warrant a lampoon .
Surely no more is needed to prove that so short a time ago we were living in another age !
At the beginning of the Ambersons ' great period most of the houses of the Midland town were of a pleasant architecture .
They lacked style , but also lacked pretentiousness , and whatever does not pretend at all has style enough .
They stood in commodious yards , well shaded by leftover forest trees , elm and walnut and beech , with here and there a line of tall sycamores where the land had been made by filling bayous from the creek .
The house of a “ prominent resident , ” facing Military Square , or National Avenue , or Tennessee Street , was built of brick upon a stone foundation , or of wood upon a brick foundation .
Usually it had a “ front porch ” and a “ back porch ” ; often a “ side porch , ” too .
There was a “ front hall ” ; there was a “ side hall ” ; and sometimes a “ back hall . ”
From the “ front hall ” opened three rooms , the “ parlour , ” the “ sitting room , ” and the “ library ” ; and the library could show warrant to its title -- for some reason these people bought books .
Commonly , the family sat more in the library than in the “ sitting room , ” while callers , when they came formally , were kept to the “ parlour , ” a place of formidable polish and discomfort .
The upholstery of the library furniture was a little shabby ; but the hostile chairs and sofa of the “ parlour ” always looked new .
For all the wear and tear they got they should have lasted a thousand years .
Upstairs were the bedrooms ; “ mother-and-father 's room ” the largest ; a smaller room for one or two sons another for one or two daughters ; each of these rooms containing a double bed , a “ washstand , ” a “ bureau , ” a wardrobe , a little table , a rocking-chair , and often a chair or two that had been slightly damaged downstairs , but not enough to justify either the expense of repair or decisive abandonment in the attic .
And there was always a “ spare-room , ” for visitors ( where the sewing-machine usually was kept ) , and during the ' seventies there developed an appreciation of the necessity for a bathroom .
Therefore the architects placed bathrooms in the new houses , and the older houses tore out a cupboard or two , set up a boiler beside the kitchen stove , and sought a new godliness , each with its own bathroom .
The great American plumber joke , that many-branched evergreen , was planted at this time .
At the rear of the house , upstairs was a bleak little chamber , called “ the girl 's room , ” and in the stable there was another bedroom , adjoining the hayloft , and called “ the hired man 's room . ”
House and stable cost seven or eight thousand dollars to build , and people with that much money to invest in such comforts were classified as the Rich .
They paid the inhabitant of “ the girl 's room ” two dollars a week , and , in the latter part of this period , two dollars and a half , and finally three dollars a week .
She was Irish , ordinarily , or German or it might be Scandinavian , but never native to the land unless she happened to be a person of colour .
The man or youth who lived in the stable had like wages , and sometimes he , too , was lately a steerage voyager , but much oftener he was coloured .
After sunrise , on pleasant mornings , the alleys behind the stables were gay ; laughter and shouting went up and down their dusty lengths , with a lively accompaniment of curry-combs knocking against back fences and stable walls , for the darkies loved to curry their horses in the alley .
Darkies always prefer to gossip in shouts instead of whispers ; and they feel that profanity , unless it be vociferous , is almost worthless .
Horrible phrases were caught by early rising children and carried to older people for definition , sometimes at inopportune moments ; while less investigative children would often merely repeat the phrases in some subsequent flurry of agitation , and yet bring about consequences so emphatic as to be recalled with ease in middle life .
They have passed , those darky hired-men of the Midland town ; and the introspective horses they curried and brushed and whacked and amiably cursed -- those good old horses switch their tails at flies no more .
For all their seeming permanence they might as well have been buffaloes -- or the buffalo laprobes that grew bald in patches and used to slide from the careless drivers ' knees and hang unconcerned , half way to the ground .
The stables have been transformed into other likenesses , or swept away , like the woodsheds where were kept the stove-wood and kindling that the “ girl ” and the “ hired-man ” always quarrelled over : who should fetch it .
Horse and stable and woodshed , and the whole tribe of the “ hired-man , ” all are gone .
They went quickly , yet so silently that we whom they served have not yet really noticed that they are vanished .
So with other vanishings .
There were the little bunty street-cars on the long , single track that went its troubled way among the cobblestones .
At the rear door of the car there was no platform , but a step where passengers clung in wet clumps when the weather was bad and the car crowded .
The patrons -- if not too absent-minded -- put their fares into a slot ; and no conductor paced the heaving floor , but the driver would rap remindingly with his elbow upon the glass of the door to his little open platform if the nickels and the passengers did not appear to coincide in number .
A lone mule drew the car , and sometimes drew it off the track , when the passengers would get out and push it on again .
They really owed it courtesies like this , for the car was genially accommodating : a lady could whistle to it from an upstairs window , and the car would halt at once and wait for her while she shut the window , put on her hat and cloak , went downstairs , found an umbrella , told the “ girl ” what to have for dinner , and came forth from the house .
The previous passengers made little objection to such gallantry on the part of the car : they were wont to expect as much for themselves on like occasion .
In good weather the mule pulled the car a mile in a little less than twenty minutes , unless the stops were too long ; but when the trolley-car came , doing its mile in five minutes and better , it would wait for nobody .
Nor could its passengers have endured such a thing , because the faster they were carried the less time they had to spare !
In the days before deathly contrivances hustled them through their lives , and when they had no telephones -- another ancient vacancy profoundly responsible for leisure -- they had time for everything : time to think , to talk , time to read , time to wait for a lady !
During the whole of a dull , dark , and soundless day in the autumn of the year , when the clouds hung oppressively low in the heavens , I had been passing alone , on horseback , through a singularly dreary tract of country ; and at length found myself , as the shades of the evening drew on , within view of the melancholy House of Usher .
I know not how it was -- but , with the first glimpse of the building , a sense of insufferable gloom pervaded my spirit .
I say insufferable ; for the feeling was unrelieved by any of that half-pleasureable , because poetic , sentiment , with which the mind usually receives even the sternest natural images of the desolate or terrible .
I looked upon the scene before me -- upon the mere house , and the simple landscape features of the domain -- upon the bleak walls -- upon the vacant eye-like windows -- upon a few rank sedges -- and upon a few white trunks of decayed trees -- with an utter depression of soul which I can compare to no earthly sensation more properly than to the after-dream of the reveller upon opium -- the bitter lapse into everyday life -- the hideous dropping off of the veil .
There was an iciness , a sinking , a sickening of the heart -- an unredeemed dreariness of thought which no goading of the imagination could torture into aught of the sublime .
What was it -- I paused to think -- what was it that so unnerved me in the contemplation of the House of Usher ?
It was a mystery all insoluble ; nor could I grapple with the shadowy fancies that crowded upon me as I pondered .
I was forced to fall back upon the unsatisfactory conclusion , that while , beyond doubt , there are combinations of very simple natural objects which have the power of thus affecting us , still the analysis of this power lies among considerations beyond our depth .
It was possible , I reflected , that a mere different arrangement of the particulars of the scene , of the details of the picture , would be sufficient to modify , or perhaps to annihilate its capacity for sorrowful impression ; and , acting upon this idea , I reined my horse to the precipitous brink of a black and lurid tarn that lay in unruffled lustre by the dwelling , and gazed down -- but with a shudder even more thrilling than before -- upon the remodelled and inverted images of the grey sedge , and the ghastly tree-stems , and the vacant and eye-like windows .
Nevertheless , in this mansion of gloom I now proposed to myself a sojourn of some weeks .
Its proprietor , Roderick Usher , had been one of my boon companions in boyhood ; but many years had elapsed since our last meeting .
A letter , however , had lately reached me in a distant part of the country -- a letter from him -- which , in its wildly importunate nature , had admitted of no other than a personal reply .
The MS gave evidence of nervous agitation .
The writer spoke of acute bodily illness -- of a mental disorder which oppressed him -- and of an earnest desire to see me , as his best , and indeed his only personal friend , with a view of attempting , by the cheerfulness of my society , some alleviation of his malady .
It was the manner in which all this , and much more , was said -- it was the apparent heart that went with his request -- which allowed me no room for hesitation ; and I accordingly obeyed forthwith what I still considered a very singular summons .
Although , as boys , we had been even intimate associates , yet I really knew little of my friend .
His reserve had been always excessive and habitual .
I was aware , however , that his very ancient family had been noted , time out of mind , for a peculiar sensibility of temperament , displaying itself , through long ages , in many works of exalted art , and manifested , of late , in repeated deeds of munificent yet unobtrusive charity , as well as in a passionate devotion to the intricacies , perhaps even more than to the orthodox and easily recognisable beauties of musical science .
I had learned , too , the very remarkable fact , that the stem of the Usher race , all time-honoured as it was , had put forth , at no period , any enduring branch ; in other words , that the entire family lay in the direct line of descent , and had always , with very trifling and very temporary variation , so lain .
It was this deficiency , I considered , while running over in thought the perfect keeping of the character of the premises with the accredited character of the people , and while speculating upon the possible influence which the one , in the long lapse of centuries , might have exercised upon the other -- it was this deficiency , perhaps , of collateral issue , and the consequent undeviating transmission , from sire to son , of the patrimony with the name , which had , at length , so identified the two as to merge the original title of the estate in the quaint and equivocal appellation of the " House of Usher " -- an appellation which seemed to include , in the minds of the peasantry who used it , both the family and the family mansion .
I have said that the sole effect of my somewhat childish experiment -- that of looking down within the tarn -- had been to deepen the first singular impression .
There can be no doubt that the consciousness of the rapid increase of my superstition -- for why should I not so term it ?
-- served mainly to accelerate the increase itself .
Such , I have long known , is the paradoxical law of all sentiments having terror as a basis .
And it might have been for this reason only , that , when I again uplifted my eyes to the house itself , from its image in the pool , there grew in my mind a strange fancy -- a fancy so ridiculous , indeed , that I but mention it to show the vivid force of the sensations which oppressed me .
I had so worked upon my imagination as really to believe that about the whole mansion and domain there hung an atmosphere peculiar to themselves and their immediate vicinity -- an atmosphere which had no affinity with the air of heaven , but which had reeked up from the decayed trees , and the grey wall , and the silent tarn -- a pestilent and mystic vapour , dull , sluggish , faintly discernible , and leaden-hued .
Shaking off from my spirit what must have been a dream , I scanned more narrowly the real aspect of the building .
Its principal feature seemed to be that of an excessive antiquity .
The discoloration of ages had been great .
Minute fungi overspread the whole exterior , hanging in a fine tangled web-work from the eaves .
Yet all this was apart from any extraordinary dilapidation .
No portion of the masonry had fallen ; and there appeared to be a wild inconsistency between its still perfect adaptation of parts , and the crumbling condition of the individual stones .
In this there was much that reminded me of the specious totality of old wood-work which has rotted for long years in some neglected vault , with no disturbance from the breath of the external air .
Beyond this indication of extensive decay , however , the fabric gave little token of instability .
Perhaps the eye of a scrutinizing observer might have discovered a barely perceptible fissure , which , extending from the roof of the building in front , made its way down the wall in a zigzag direction , until it became lost in the sullen waters of the tarn .
Noticing these things , I rode over a short causeway to the house .
A servant in waiting took my horse , and I entered the Gothic archway of the hall .
A valet , of stealthy step , thence conducted me , in silence , through many dark and intricate passages in my progress to the studio of his master .
Much that I encountered on the way contributed , I know not how , to heighten the vague sentiments of which I have already spoken .
While the objects around me -- while the carvings of the ceilings , the sombre tapestries of the walls , the ebon blackness of the floors , and the phantasmagoric armorial trophies which rattled as I strode , were but matters to which , or to such as which , I had been accustomed from my infancy -- while I hesitated not to acknowledge how familiar was all this -- I still wondered to find how unfamiliar were the fancies which ordinary images were stirring up .
On one of the staircases , I met the physician of the family .
His countenance , I thought , wore a mingled expression of low cunning and perplexity .
He accosted me with trepidation and passed on .
The valet now threw open a door and ushered me into the presence of his master .
The room in which I found myself was very large and lofty .
The windows were long , narrow , and pointed , and at so vast a distance from the black oaken floor as to be altogether inaccessible from within .
Feeble gleams of encrimsoned light made their way through the trellised panes , and served to render sufficiently distinct the more prominent objects around ; the eye , however , struggled in vain to reach the remoter angles of the chamber , or the recesses of the vaulted and fretted ceiling .
Dark draperies hung upon the walls .
The general furniture was profuse , comfortless , antique , and tattered .
Many books and musical instruments lay scattered about , but failed to give any vitality to the scene .
I felt that I breathed an atmosphere of sorrow .
An air of stern , deep , and irredeemable gloom hung over and pervaded all .
Upon my entrance , Usher rose from a sofa on which he had been lying at full length , and greeted me with a vivacious warmth which had much in it , I at first thought , of an overdone cordiality -- of the constrained effort of the ennuye man of the world .
A glance , however , at his countenance , convinced me of his perfect sincerity .
We sat down ; and for some moments , while he spoke not , I gazed upon him with a feeling half of pity , half of awe .
Surely , man had never before so terribly altered , in so brief a period , as had Roderick Usher !
It was with difficulty that I could bring myself to admit the identity of the wan being before me with the companion of my early boyhood .
Yet the character of his face had been at all times remarkable .
A cadaverousness of complexion ; an eye large , liquid , and luminous beyond comparison ; lips somewhat thin and very pallid , but of a surpassingly beautiful curve ; a nose of a delicate Hebrew model , but with a breadth of nostril unusual in similar formations ; a finely-moulded chin , speaking , in its want of prominence , of a want of moral energy ; hair of a more than web-like softness and tenuity ; these features , with an inordinate expansion above the regions of the temple , made up altogether a countenance not easily to be forgotten .
And now in the mere exaggeration of the prevailing character of these features , and of the expression they were wont to convey , lay so much of change that I doubted to whom I spoke .
The now ghastly pallor of the skin , and the now miraculous lustre of the eye , above all things startled and even awed me .
The silken hair , too , had been suffered to grow all unheeded , and as , in its wild gossamer texture , it floated rather than fell about the face , I could not , even with effort , connect its Arabesque expression with any idea of simple humanity .
CHAPTER 1 “ Mine ear is open , and my heart prepared : The worst is wordly loss thou canst unfold : -- Say , is my kingdom lost ? ”
-- Shakespeare It was a feature peculiar to the colonial wars of North America , that the toils and dangers of the wilderness were to be encountered before the adverse hosts could meet .
A wide and apparently an impervious boundary of forests severed the possessions of the hostile provinces of France and England .
The hardy colonist , and the trained European who fought at his side , frequently expended months in struggling against the rapids of the streams , or in effecting the rugged passes of the mountains , in quest of an opportunity to exhibit their courage in a more martial conflict .
But , emulating the patience and self-denial of the practiced native warriors , they learned to overcome every difficulty ; and it would seem that , in time , there was no recess of the woods so dark , nor any secret place so lovely , that it might claim exemption from the inroads of those who had pledged their blood to satiate their vengeance , or to uphold the cold and selfish policy of the distant monarchs of Europe .
Perhaps no district throughout the wide extent of the intermediate frontiers can furnish a livelier picture of the cruelty and fierceness of the savage warfare of those periods than the country which lies between the head waters of the Hudson and the adjacent lakes .
The facilities which nature had there offered to the march of the combatants were too obvious to be neglected .
The lengthened sheet of the Champlain stretched from the frontiers of Canada , deep within the borders of the neighboring province of New York , forming a natural passage across half the distance that the French were compelled to master in order to strike their enemies .
Near its southern termination , it received the contributions of another lake , whose waters were so limpid as to have been exclusively selected by the Jesuit missionaries to perform the typical purification of baptism , and to obtain for it the title of lake “ du Saint Sacrement . ”
The less zealous English thought they conferred a sufficient honor on its unsullied fountains , when they bestowed the name of their reigning prince , the second of the house of Hanover .
The two united to rob the untutored possessors of its wooded scenery of their native right to perpetuate its original appellation of “ Horican . ”
* * As each nation of the Indians had its language or its dialect , they usually gave different names to the same places , though nearly all of their appellations were descriptive of the object .
Thus a literal translation of the name of this beautiful sheet of water , used by the tribe that dwelt on its banks , would be “ The Tail of the Lake . ”
Lake George , as it is vulgarly , and now , indeed , legally , called , forms a sort of tail to Lake Champlain , when viewed on the map .
Hence , the name .
Winding its way among countless islands , and imbedded in mountains , the “ holy lake ” extended a dozen leagues still further to the south .
With the high plain that there interposed itself to the further passage of the water , commenced a portage of as many miles , which conducted the adventurer to the banks of the Hudson , at a point where , with the usual obstructions of the rapids , or rifts , as they were then termed in the language of the country , the river became navigable to the tide .
While , in the pursuit of their daring plans of annoyance , the restless enterprise of the French even attempted the distant and difficult gorges of the Alleghany , it may easily be imagined that their proverbial acuteness would not overlook the natural advantages of the district we have just described .
It became , emphatically , the bloody arena , in which most of the battles for the mastery of the colonies were contested .
Forts were erected at the different points that commanded the facilities of the route , and were taken and retaken , razed and rebuilt , as victory alighted on the hostile banners .
While the husbandman shrank back from the dangerous passes , within the safer boundaries of the more ancient settlements , armies larger than those that had often disposed of the scepters of the mother countries , were seen to bury themselves in these forests , whence they rarely returned but in skeleton bands , that were haggard with care or dejected by defeat .
Though the arts of peace were unknown to this fatal region , its forests were alive with men ; its shades and glens rang with the sounds of martial music , and the echoes of its mountains threw back the laugh , or repeated the wanton cry , of many a gallant and reckless youth , as he hurried by them , in the noontide of his spirits , to slumber in a long night of forgetfulness .
It was in this scene of strife and bloodshed that the incidents we shall attempt to relate occurred , during the third year of the war which England and France last waged for the possession of a country that neither was destined to retain .
The imbecility of her military leaders abroad , and the fatal want of energy in her councils at home , had lowered the character of Great Britain from the proud elevation on which it had been placed by the talents and enterprise of her former warriors and statesmen .
No longer dreaded by her enemies , her servants were fast losing the confidence of self-respect .
In this mortifying abasement , the colonists , though innocent of her imbecility , and too humble to be the agents of her blunders , were but the natural participators .
They had recently seen a chosen army from that country , which , reverencing as a mother , they had blindly believed invincible -- an army led by a chief who had been selected from a crowd of trained warriors , for his rare military endowments , disgracefully routed by a handful of French and Indians , and only saved from annihilation by the coolness and spirit of a Virginian boy , whose riper fame has since diffused itself , with the steady influence of moral truth , to the uttermost confines of Christendom .
* A wide frontier had been laid naked by this unexpected disaster , and more substantial evils were preceded by a thousand fanciful and imaginary dangers .
The alarmed colonists believed that the yells of the savages mingled with every fitful gust of wind that issued from the interminable forests of the west .
The terrific character of their merciless enemies increased immeasurably the natural horrors of warfare .
Numberless recent massacres were still vivid in their recollections ; nor was there any ear in the provinces so deaf as not to have drunk in with avidity the narrative of some fearful tale of midnight murder , in which the natives of the forests were the principal and barbarous actors .
As the credulous and excited traveler related the hazardous chances of the wilderness , the blood of the timid curdled with terror , and mothers cast anxious glances even at those children which slumbered within the security of the largest towns .
In short , the magnifying influence of fear began to set at naught the calculations of reason , and to render those who should have remembered their manhood , the slaves of the basest passions .
Even the most confident and the stoutest hearts began to think the issue of the contest was becoming doubtful ; and that abject class was hourly increasing in numbers , who thought they foresaw all the possessions of the English crown in America subdued by their Christian foes , or laid waste by the inroads of their relentless allies .
* Washington , who , after uselessly admonishing the European general of the danger into which he was heedlessly running , saved the remnants of the British army , on this occasion , by his decision and courage .
The reputation earned by Washington in this battle was the principal cause of his being selected to command the American armies at a later day .
It is a circumstance worthy of observation , that while all America rang with his well-merited reputation , his name does not occur in any European account of the battle ; at least the author has searched for it without success .
In this manner does the mother country absorb even the fame , under that system of rule .
When , therefore , intelligence was received at the fort which covered the southern termination of the portage between the Hudson and the lakes , that Montcalm had been seen moving up the Champlain , with an army “ numerous as the leaves on the trees , ” its truth was admitted with more of the craven reluctance of fear than with the stern joy that a warrior should feel , in finding an enemy within reach of his blow .
The news had been brought , toward the decline of a day in midsummer , by an Indian runner , who also bore an urgent request from Munro , the commander of a work on the shore of the “ holy lake , ” for a speedy and powerful reinforcement .
It has already been mentioned that the distance between these two posts was less than five leagues .
The rude path , which originally formed their line of communication , had been widened for the passage of wagons ; so that the distance which had been traveled by the son of the forest in two hours , might easily be effected by a detachment of troops , with their necessary baggage , between the rising and setting of a summer sun .
The loyal servants of the British crown had given to one of these forest-fastnesses the name of William Henry , and to the other that of Fort Edward , calling each after a favorite prince of the reigning family .
The veteran Scotchman just named held the first , with a regiment of regulars and a few provincials ; a force really by far too small to make head against the formidable power that Montcalm was leading to the foot of his earthen mounds .
At the latter , however , lay General Webb , who commanded the armies of the king in the northern provinces , with a body of more than five thousand men .
By uniting the several detachments of his command , this officer might have arrayed nearly double that number of combatants against the enterprising Frenchman , who had ventured so far from his reinforcements , with an army but little superior in numbers .
But under the influence of their degraded fortunes , both officers and men appeared better disposed to await the approach of their formidable antagonists , within their works , than to resist the progress of their march , by emulating the successful example of the French at Fort du Quesne , and striking a blow on their advance .
After the first surprise of the intelligence had a little abated , a rumor was spread through the entrenched camp , which stretched along the margin of the Hudson , forming a chain of outworks to the body of the fort itself , that a chosen detachment of fifteen hundred men was to depart , with the dawn , for William Henry , the post at the northern extremity of the portage .
That which at first was only rumor , soon became certainty , as orders passed from the quarters of the commander-in-chief to the several corps he had selected for this service , to prepare for their speedy departure .
All doubts as to the intention of Webb now vanished , and an hour or two of hurried footsteps and anxious faces succeeded .
The novice in the military art flew from point to point , retarding his own preparations by the excess of his violent and somewhat distempered zeal ; while the more practiced veteran made his arrangements with a deliberation that scorned every appearance of haste ; though his sober lineaments and anxious eye sufficiently betrayed that he had no very strong professional relish for the , as yet , untried and dreaded warfare of the wilderness .
At length the sun set in a flood of glory , behind the distant western hills , and as darkness drew its veil around the secluded spot the sounds of preparation diminished ; the last light finally disappeared from the log cabin of some officer ; the trees cast their deeper shadows over the mounds and the rippling stream , and a silence soon pervaded the camp , as deep as that which reigned in the vast forest by which it was environed .
CHAPTER 1 The Rassendylls -- With a Word on the Elphbergs “ I wonder when in the world you ’re going to do anything , Rudolf ? ” said my brother ’s wife .
“ My dear Rose , ” I answered , laying down my egg-spoon , “ why in the world should I do anything ?
My position is a comfortable one .
I have an income nearly sufficient for my wants ( no one ’s income is ever quite sufficient , you know ) , I enjoy an enviable social position : I am brother to Lord Burlesdon , and brother-in-law to that charming lady , his countess .
Behold , it is enough ! ”
“ You are nine-and-twenty , ” she observed , “ and you ’ve done nothing but -- ” “ Knock about ?
It is true .
Our family does n’t need to do things . ”
This remark of mine rather annoyed Rose , for everybody knows ( and therefore there can be no harm in referring to the fact ) that , pretty and accomplished as she herself is , her family is hardly of the same standing as the Rassendylls .
Besides her attractions , she possessed a large fortune , and my brother Robert was wise enough not to mind about her ancestry .
Ancestry is , in fact , a matter concerning which the next observation of Rose ’s has some truth .
“ Good families are generally worse than any others , ” she said .
Upon this I stroked my hair : I knew quite well what she meant .
“ I ’m so glad Robert ’s is black ! ” she cried .
At this moment Robert ( who rises at seven and works before breakfast ) came in .
He glanced at his wife : her cheek was slightly flushed ; he patted it caressingly .
“ What ’s the matter , my dear ? ” he asked .
“ She objects to my doing nothing and having red hair , ” said I , in an injured tone .
“ Oh !
of course he ca n’t help his hair , ” admitted Rose .
“ It generally crops out once in a generation , ” said my brother .
“ So does the nose .
Rudolf has got them both . ”
“ I wish they did n’t crop out , ” said Rose , still flushed .
“ I rather like them myself , ” said I , and , rising , I bowed to the portrait of Countess Amelia .
My brother ’s wife uttered an exclamation of impatience .
“ I wish you ’d take that picture away , Robert , ” said she .
“ My dear ! ” he cried .
“ Good heavens ! ”
I added .
“ Then it might be forgotten , ” she continued .
“ Hardly -- with Rudolf about , ” said Robert , shaking his head .
“ Why should it be forgotten ? ”
I asked .
“ Rudolf ! ” exclaimed my brother ’s wife , blushing very prettily .
I laughed , and went on with my egg .
At least I had shelved the question of what ( if anything ) I ought to do .
And , by way of closing the discussion -- and also , I must admit , of exasperating my strict little sister-in-law a trifle more -- I observed : “ I rather like being an Elphberg myself . ”
When I read a story , I skip the explanations ; yet the moment I begin to write one , I find that I must have an explanation .
For it is manifest that I must explain why my sister-in-law was vexed with my nose and hair , and why I ventured to call myself an Elphberg .
For eminent as , I must protest , the Rassendylls have been for many generations , yet participation in their blood of course does not , at first sight , justify the boast of a connection with the grander stock of the Elphbergs or a claim to be one of that Royal House .
For what relationship is there between Ruritania and Burlesdon , between the Palace at Strelsau or the Castle of Zenda and Number 305 Park Lane , W. ?
Well then -- and I must premise that I am going , perforce , to rake up the very scandal which my dear Lady Burlesdon wishes forgotten -- in the year 1733 , George II .
sitting then on the throne , peace reigning for the moment , and the King and the Prince of Wales being not yet at loggerheads , there came on a visit to the English Court a certain prince , who was afterwards known to history as Rudolf the Third of Ruritania .
The prince was a tall , handsome young fellow , marked ( maybe marred , it is not for me to say ) by a somewhat unusually long , sharp and straight nose , and a mass of dark-red hair -- in fact , the nose and the hair which have stamped the Elphbergs time out of mind .
He stayed some months in England , where he was most courteously received ; yet , in the end , he left rather under a cloud .
For he fought a duel ( it was considered highly well bred of him to waive all question of his rank ) with a nobleman , well known in the society of the day , not only for his own merits , but as the husband of a very beautiful wife .
In that duel Prince Rudolf received a severe wound , and , recovering therefrom , was adroitly smuggled off by the Ruritanian ambassador , who had found him a pretty handful .
The nobleman was not wounded in the duel ; but the morning being raw and damp on the occasion of the meeting , he contracted a severe chill , and , failing to throw it off , he died some six months after the departure of Prince Rudolf , without having found leisure to adjust his relations with his wife -- who , after another two months , bore an heir to the title and estates of the family of Burlesdon .
This lady was the Countess Amelia , whose picture my sister-in-law wished to remove from the drawing-room in Park Lane ; and her husband was James , fifth Earl of Burlesdon and twenty-second Baron Rassendyll , both in the peerage of England , and a Knight of the Garter .
As for Rudolf , he went back to Ruritania , married a wife , and ascended the throne , whereon his progeny in the direct line have sat from then till this very hour -- with one short interval .
And , finally , if you walk through the picture galleries at Burlesdon , among the fifty portraits or so of the last century and a half , you will find five or six , including that of the sixth earl , distinguished by long , sharp , straight noses and a quantity of dark-red hair ; these five or six have also blue eyes , whereas among the Rassendylls dark eyes are the commoner .
That is the explanation , and I am glad to have finished it : the blemishes on honourable lineage are a delicate subject , and certainly this heredity we hear so much about is the finest scandalmonger in the world ; it laughs at discretion , and writes strange entries between the lines of the “ Peerages ” .
It will be observed that my sister-in-law , with a want of logic that must have been peculiar to herself ( since we are no longer allowed to lay it to the charge of her sex ) , treated my complexion almost as an offence for which I was responsible , hastening to assume from that external sign inward qualities of which I protest my entire innocence ; and this unjust inference she sought to buttress by pointing to the uselessness of the life I had led .
Well , be that as it may , I had picked up a good deal of pleasure and a good deal of knowledge .
I had been to a German school and a German university , and spoke German as readily and perfectly as English ; I was thoroughly at home in French ; I had a smattering of Italian and enough Spanish to swear by .
I was , I believe , a strong , though hardly fine swordsman and a good shot .
I could ride anything that had a back to sit on ; and my head was as cool a one as you could find , for all its flaming cover .
If you say that I ought to have spent my time in useful labour , I am out of Court and have nothing to say , save that my parents had no business to leave me two thousand pounds a year and a roving disposition .
“ The difference between you and Robert , ” said my sister-in-law , who often ( bless her ! )
speaks on a platform , and oftener still as if she were on one , “ is that he recognizes the duties of his position , and you see the opportunities of yours . ”
“ To a man of spirit , my dear Rose , ” I answered , “ opportunities are duties . ”
“ Nonsense ! ” said she , tossing her head ; and after a moment she went on : “ Now , here ’s Sir Jacob Borrodaile offering you exactly what you might be equal to . ”
“ A thousand thanks ! ”
I murmured .
“ He ’s to have an Embassy in six months , and Robert says he is sure that he ’ll take you as an attache .
Do take it , Rudolf -- to please me . ”
Now , when my sister-in-law puts the matter in that way , wrinkling her pretty brows , twisting her little hands , and growing wistful in the eyes , all on account of an idle scamp like myself , for whom she has no natural responsibility , I am visited with compunction .
Moreover , I thought it possible that I could pass the time in the position suggested with some tolerable amusement .
Therefore I said : “ My dear sister , if in six months ’ time no unforeseen obstacle has arisen , and Sir Jacob invites me , hang me if I do n’t go with Sir Jacob ! ”
“ Oh , Rudolf , how good of you !
I am glad ! ”
“ Where ’s he going to ? ”
“ He does n’t know yet ; but it ’s sure to be a good Embassy . ”
“ Madame , ” said I , “ for your sake I ’ll go , if it ’s no more than a beggarly Legation .
When I do a thing , I do n’t do it by halves . ”
My promise , then , was given ; but six months are six months , and seem an eternity , and , inasmuch as they stretched between me and my prospective industry ( I suppose attaches are industrious ; but I know not , for I never became attache to Sir Jacob or anybody else ) , I cast about for some desirable mode of spending them .
And it occurred to me suddenly that I would visit Ruritania .
It may seem strange that I had never visited that country yet ; but my father ( in spite of a sneaking fondness for the Elphbergs , which led him to give me , his second son , the famous Elphberg name of Rudolf ) had always been averse from my going , and , since his death , my brother , prompted by Rose , had accepted the family tradition which taught that a wide berth was to be given to that country .
But the moment Ruritania had come into my head I was eaten up with a curiosity to see it .
After all , red hair and long noses are not confined to the House of Elphberg , and the old story seemed a preposterously insufficient reason for debarring myself from acquaintance with a highly interesting and important kingdom , one which had played no small part in European history , and might do the like again under the sway of a young and vigorous ruler , such as the new King was rumoured to be .
My determination was clinched by reading in _ The Times _ that Rudolf the Fifth was to be crowned at Strelsau in the course of the next three weeks , and that great magnificence was to mark the occasion .
At once I made up my mind to be present , and began my preparations .
But , inasmuch as it has never been my practice to furnish my relatives with an itinerary of my journeys and in this case I anticipated opposition to my wishes , I gave out that I was going for a ramble in the Tyrol -- an old haunt of mine -- and propitiated Rose ’s wrath by declaring that I intended to study the political and social problems of the interesting community which dwells in that neighbourhood .
CHAPTER I You must go back with me to the autumn of 1827 .
My father , as you know , was a sort of gentleman farmer in — shire ; and I , by his express desire , succeeded him in the same quiet occupation , not very willingly , for ambition urged me to higher aims , and self-conceit assured me that , in disregarding its voice , I was burying my talent in the earth , and hiding my light under a bushel .
My mother had done her utmost to persuade me that I was capable of great achievements ; but my father , who thought ambition was the surest road to ruin , and change but another word for destruction , would listen to no scheme for bettering either my own condition , or that of my fellow mortals .
He assured me it was all rubbish , and exhorted me , with his dying breath , to continue in the good old way , to follow his steps , and those of his father before him , and let my highest ambition be to walk honestly through the world , looking neither to the right hand nor to the left , and to transmit the paternal acres to my children in , at least , as flourishing a condition as he left them to me .
‘ Well !
— an honest and industrious farmer is one of the most useful members of society ; and if I devote my talents to the cultivation of my farm , and the improvement of agriculture in general , I shall thereby benefit , not only my own immediate connections and dependants , but , in some degree , mankind at large : — hence I shall not have lived in vain . ’
With such reflections as these I was endeavouring to console myself , as I plodded home from the fields , one cold , damp , cloudy evening towards the close of October .
But the gleam of a bright red fire through the parlour window had more effect in cheering my spirits , and rebuking my thankless repinings , than all the sage reflections and good resolutions I had forced my mind to frame ; — for I was young then , remember — only four-and-twenty — and had not acquired half the rule over my own spirit that I now possess — trifling as that may be .
However , that haven of bliss must not be entered till I had exchanged my miry boots for a clean pair of shoes , and my rough surtout for a respectable coat , and made myself generally presentable before decent society ; for my mother , with all her kindness , was vastly particular on certain points .
In ascending to my room I was met upon the stairs by a smart , pretty girl of nineteen , with a tidy , dumpy figure , a round face , bright , blooming cheeks , glossy , clustering curls , and little merry brown eyes .
I need not tell you this was my sister Rose .
She is , I know , a comely matron still , and , doubtless , no less lovely — in your eyes — than on the happy day you first beheld her .
Nothing told me then that she , a few years hence , would be the wife of one entirely unknown to me as yet , but destined hereafter to become a closer friend than even herself , more intimate than that unmannerly lad of seventeen , by whom I was collared in the passage , on coming down , and well-nigh jerked off my equilibrium , and who , in correction for his impudence , received a resounding whack over the sconce , which , however , sustained no serious injury from the infliction ; as , besides being more than commonly thick , it was protected by a redundant shock of short , reddish curls , that my mother called auburn .
On entering the parlour we found that honoured lady seated in her arm-chair at the fireside , working away at her knitting , according to her usual custom , when she had nothing else to do .
She had swept the hearth , and made a bright blazing fire for our reception ; the servant had just brought in the tea-tray ; and Rose was producing the sugar-basin and tea-caddy from the cupboard in the black oak side-board , that shone like polished ebony , in the cheerful parlour twilight .
‘ Well !
here they both are , ’ cried my mother , looking round upon us without retarding the motion of her nimble fingers and glittering needles .
‘ Now shut the door , and come to the fire , while Rose gets the tea ready ; I ’m sure you must be starved ; — and tell me what you ’ve been about all day ; — I like to know what my children have been about . ’
‘ I ’ve been breaking in the grey colt — no easy business that — directing the ploughing of the last wheat stubble — for the ploughboy has not the sense to direct himself — and carrying out a plan for the extensive and efficient draining of the low meadowlands . ’
‘ That ’s my brave boy !
— and Fergus , what have you been doing ? ’
‘ Badger-baiting . ’
And here he proceeded to give a particular account of his sport , and the respective traits of prowess evinced by the badger and the dogs ; my mother pretending to listen with deep attention , and watching his animated countenance with a degree of maternal admiration I thought highly disproportioned to its object .
‘ It ’s time you should be doing something else , Fergus , ’ said I , as soon as a momentary pause in his narration allowed me to get in a word .
‘ What can I do ? ’
replied he ; ‘ my mother wo n’t let me go to sea or enter the army ; and I ’m determined to do nothing else — except make myself such a nuisance to you all , that you will be thankful to get rid of me on any terms . ’
Our parent soothingly stroked his stiff , short curls .
He growled , and tried to look sulky , and then we all took our seats at the table , in obedience to the thrice-repeated summons of Rose .
‘ Now take your tea , ’ said she ; ‘ and I ’ll tell you what I ’ve been doing .
I ’ve been to call on the Wilsons ; and it ’s a thousand pities you did n’t go with me , Gilbert , for Eliza Millward was there ! ’
‘ Well !
what of her ? ’
‘ Oh , nothing !
— I ’m not going to tell you about her ; — only that she ’s a nice , amusing little thing , when she is in a merry humour , and I should n’t mind calling her — ’ ‘ Hush , hush , my dear !
your brother has no such idea ! ’
whispered my mother earnestly , holding up her finger .
‘ Well , ’ resumed Rose ; ‘ I was going to tell you an important piece of news I heard there — I have been bursting with it ever since .
You know it was reported a month ago , that somebody was going to take Wildfell Hall — and — what do you think ?
It has actually been inhabited above a week !
— and we never knew ! ’
‘ Impossible ! ’
cried my mother .
‘ Preposterous !!! ’
shrieked Fergus .
‘ It has indeed !
— and by a single lady ! ’
‘ Good gracious , my dear !
The place is in ruins ! ’
‘ She has had two or three rooms made habitable ; and there she lives , all alone — except an old woman for a servant ! ’
‘ Oh , dear !
that spoils it — I ’d hoped she was a witch , ’ observed Fergus , while carving his inch-thick slice of bread and butter .
‘ Nonsense , Fergus !
But is n’t it strange , mamma ? ’
‘ Strange !
I can hardly believe it . ’
‘ But you may believe it ; for Jane Wilson has seen her .
She went with her mother , who , of course , when she heard of a stranger being in the neighbourhood , would be on pins and needles till she had seen her and got all she could out of her .
She is called Mrs. Graham , and she is in mourning — not widow ’s weeds , but slightish mourning — and she is quite young , they say , — not above five or six and twenty , — but so reserved !
They tried all they could to find out who she was and where she came from , and , all about her , but neither Mrs. Wilson , with her pertinacious and impertinent home-thrusts , nor Miss Wilson , with her skilful manoeuvring , could manage to elicit a single satisfactory answer , or even a casual remark , or chance expression calculated to allay their curiosity , or throw the faintest ray of light upon her history , circumstances , or connections .
Moreover , she was barely civil to them , and evidently better pleased to say ‘ good-by , ’ than ‘ how do you do . ’
But Eliza Millward says her father intends to call upon her soon , to offer some pastoral advice , which he fears she needs , as , though she is known to have entered the neighbourhood early last week , she did not make her appearance at church on Sunday ; and she — Eliza , that is — will beg to accompany him , and is sure she can succeed in wheedling something out of her — you know , Gilbert , she can do anything .
And we should call some time , mamma ; it ’s only proper , you know . ’
‘ Of course , my dear .
Poor thing !
How lonely she must feel ! ’
‘ And pray , be quick about it ; and mind you bring me word how much sugar she puts in her tea , and what sort of caps and aprons she wears , and all about it ; for I do n’t know how I can live till I know , ’ said Fergus , very gravely .
But if he intended the speech to be hailed as a master-stroke of wit , he signally failed , for nobody laughed .
However , he was not much disconcerted at that ; for when he had taken a mouthful of bread and butter and was about to swallow a gulp of tea , the humour of the thing burst upon him with such irresistible force , that he was obliged to jump up from the table , and rush snorting and choking from the room ; and a minute after , was heard screaming in fearful agony in the garden .
As for me , I was hungry , and contented myself with silently demolishing the tea , ham , and toast , while my mother and sister went on talking , and continued to discuss the apparent or non-apparent circumstances , and probable or improbable history of the mysterious lady ; but I must confess that , after my brother ’s misadventure , I once or twice raised the cup to my lips , and put it down again without daring to taste the contents , lest I should injure my dignity by a similar explosion .
CHAPTER I Mr Verloc , going out in the morning , left his shop nominally in charge of his brother-in-law .
It could be done , because there was very little business at any time , and practically none at all before the evening .
Mr Verloc cared but little about his ostensible business .
And , moreover , his wife was in charge of his brother-in-law .
The shop was small , and so was the house .
It was one of those grimy brick houses which existed in large quantities before the era of reconstruction dawned upon London .
The shop was a square box of a place , with the front glazed in small panes .
In the daytime the door remained closed ; in the evening it stood discreetly but suspiciously ajar .
The window contained photographs of more or less undressed dancing girls ; nondescript packages in wrappers like patent medicines ; closed yellow paper envelopes , very flimsy , and marked two-and-six in heavy black figures ; a few numbers of ancient French comic publications hung across a string as if to dry ; a dingy blue china bowl , a casket of black wood , bottles of marking ink , and rubber stamps ; a few books , with titles hinting at impropriety ; a few apparently old copies of obscure newspapers , badly printed , with titles like _ The Torch _ , _ The Gong _ — rousing titles .
And the two gas jets inside the panes were always turned low , either for economy ’s sake or for the sake of the customers .
These customers were either very young men , who hung about the window for a time before slipping in suddenly ; or men of a more mature age , but looking generally as if they were not in funds .
Some of that last kind had the collars of their overcoats turned right up to their moustaches , and traces of mud on the bottom of their nether garments , which had the appearance of being much worn and not very valuable .
And the legs inside them did not , as a general rule , seem of much account either .
With their hands plunged deep in the side pockets of their coats , they dodged in sideways , one shoulder first , as if afraid to start the bell going .
The bell , hung on the door by means of a curved ribbon of steel , was difficult to circumvent .
It was hopelessly cracked ; but of an evening , at the slightest provocation , it clattered behind the customer with impudent virulence .
It clattered ; and at that signal , through the dusty glass door behind the painted deal counter , Mr Verloc would issue hastily from the parlour at the back .
His eyes were naturally heavy ; he had an air of having wallowed , fully dressed , all day on an unmade bed .
Another man would have felt such an appearance a distinct disadvantage .
In a commercial transaction of the retail order much depends on the seller ’s engaging and amiable aspect .
But Mr Verloc knew his business , and remained undisturbed by any sort of æsthetic doubt about his appearance .
With a firm , steady-eyed impudence , which seemed to hold back the threat of some abominable menace , he would proceed to sell over the counter some object looking obviously and scandalously not worth the money which passed in the transaction : a small cardboard box with apparently nothing inside , for instance , or one of those carefully closed yellow flimsy envelopes , or a soiled volume in paper covers with a promising title .
Now and then it happened that one of the faded , yellow dancing girls would get sold to an amateur , as though she had been alive and young .
Sometimes it was Mrs Verloc who would appear at the call of the cracked bell .
Winnie Verloc was a young woman with a full bust , in a tight bodice , and with broad hips .
Her hair was very tidy .
Steady-eyed like her husband , she preserved an air of unfathomable indifference behind the rampart of the counter .
Then the customer of comparatively tender years would get suddenly disconcerted at having to deal with a woman , and with rage in his heart would proffer a request for a bottle of marking ink , retail value sixpence ( price in Verloc ’s shop one-and-sixpence ) , which , once outside , he would drop stealthily into the gutter .
The evening visitors — the men with collars turned up and soft hats rammed down — nodded familiarly to Mrs Verloc , and with a muttered greeting , lifted up the flap at the end of the counter in order to pass into the back parlour , which gave access to a passage and to a steep flight of stairs .
The door of the shop was the only means of entrance to the house in which Mr Verloc carried on his business of a seller of shady wares , exercised his vocation of a protector of society , and cultivated his domestic virtues .
These last were pronounced .
He was thoroughly domesticated .
Neither his spiritual , nor his mental , nor his physical needs were of the kind to take him much abroad .
He found at home the ease of his body and the peace of his conscience , together with Mrs Verloc ’s wifely attentions and Mrs Verloc ’s mother ’s deferential regard .
Winnie ’s mother was a stout , wheezy woman , with a large brown face .
She wore a black wig under a white cap .
Her swollen legs rendered her inactive .
She considered herself to be of French descent , which might have been true ; and after a good many years of married life with a licensed victualler of the more common sort , she provided for the years of widowhood by letting furnished apartments for gentlemen near Vauxhall Bridge Road in a square once of some splendour and still included in the district of Belgravia .
This topographical fact was of some advantage in advertising her rooms ; but the patrons of the worthy widow were not exactly of the fashionable kind .
Such as they were , her daughter Winnie helped to look after them .
Traces of the French descent which the widow boasted of were apparent in Winnie too .
They were apparent in the extremely neat and artistic arrangement of her glossy dark hair .
Winnie had also other charms : her youth ; her full , rounded form ; her clear complexion ; the provocation of her unfathomable reserve , which never went so far as to prevent conversation , carried on on the lodgers ’ part with animation , and on hers with an equable amiability .
It must be that Mr Verloc was susceptible to these fascinations .
Mr Verloc was an intermittent patron .
He came and went without any very apparent reason .
He generally arrived in London ( like the influenza ) from the Continent , only he arrived unheralded by the Press ; and his visitations set in with great severity .
He breakfasted in bed , and remained wallowing there with an air of quiet enjoyment till noon every day — and sometimes even to a later hour .
But when he went out he seemed to experience a great difficulty in finding his way back to his temporary home in the Belgravian square .
He left it late , and returned to it early — as early as three or four in the morning ; and on waking up at ten addressed Winnie , bringing in the breakfast tray , with jocular , exhausted civility , in the hoarse , failing tones of a man who had been talking vehemently for many hours together .
His prominent , heavy-lidded eyes rolled sideways amorously and languidly , the bedclothes were pulled up to his chin , and his dark smooth moustache covered his thick lips capable of much honeyed banter .
In Winnie ’s mother ’s opinion Mr Verloc was a very nice gentleman .
From her life ’s experience gathered in various “ business houses ” the good woman had taken into her retirement an ideal of gentlemanliness as exhibited by the patrons of private-saloon bars .
Mr Verloc approached that ideal ; he attained it , in fact .
“ Of course , we ’ll take over your furniture , mother , ” Winnie had remarked .
The lodging-house was to be given up .
It seems it would not answer to carry it on .
It would have been too much trouble for Mr Verloc .
It would not have been convenient for his other business .
What his business was he did not say ; but after his engagement to Winnie he took the trouble to get up before noon , and descending the basement stairs , make himself pleasant to Winnie ’s mother in the breakfast-room downstairs where she had her motionless being .
He stroked the cat , poked the fire , had his lunch served to him there .
He left its slightly stuffy cosiness with evident reluctance , but , all the same , remained out till the night was far advanced .
He never offered to take Winnie to theatres , as such a nice gentleman ought to have done .
His evenings were occupied .
His work was in a way political , he told Winnie once .
She would have , he warned her , to be very nice to his political friends .
And with her straight , unfathomable glance she answered that she would be so , of course .
How much more he told her as to his occupation it was impossible for Winnie ’s mother to discover .
The married couple took her over with the furniture .
The mean aspect of the shop surprised her .
The change from the Belgravian square to the narrow street in Soho affected her legs adversely .
They became of an enormous size .
On the other hand , she experienced a complete relief from material cares .
Her son-in-law ’s heavy good nature inspired her with a sense of absolute safety .
Her daughter ’s future was obviously assured , and even as to her son Stevie she need have no anxiety .
She had not been able to conceal from herself that he was a terrible encumbrance , that poor Stevie .
But in view of Winnie ’s fondness for her delicate brother , and of Mr Verloc ’s kind and generous disposition , she felt that the poor boy was pretty safe in this rough world .
And in her heart of hearts she was not perhaps displeased that the Verlocs had no children .
As that circumstance seemed perfectly indifferent to Mr Verloc , and as Winnie found an object of quasi-maternal affection in her brother , perhaps this was just as well for poor Stevie .
For he was difficult to dispose of , that boy .
He was delicate and , in a frail way , good-looking too , except for the vacant droop of his lower lip .
Under our excellent system of compulsory education he had learned to read and write , notwithstanding the unfavourable aspect of the lower lip .
But as errand-boy he did not turn out a great success .
He forgot his messages ; he was easily diverted from the straight path of duty by the attractions of stray cats and dogs , which he followed down narrow alleys into unsavoury courts ; by the comedies of the streets , which he contemplated open-mouthed , to the detriment of his employer ’s interests ; or by the dramas of fallen horses , whose pathos and violence induced him sometimes to shriek pierceingly in a crowd , which disliked to be disturbed by sounds of distress in its quiet enjoyment of the national spectacle .
When led away by a grave and protecting policeman , it would often become apparent that poor Stevie had forgotten his address — at least for a time .
A brusque question caused him to stutter to the point of suffocation .
When startled by anything perplexing he used to squint horribly .
However , he never had any fits ( which was encouraging ) ; and before the natural outbursts of impatience on the part of his father he could always , in his childhood ’s days , run for protection behind the short skirts of his sister Winnie .
On the other hand , he might have been suspected of hiding a fund of reckless naughtiness .
When he had reached the age of fourteen a friend of his late father , an agent for a foreign preserved milk firm , having given him an opening as office-boy , he was discovered one foggy afternoon , in his chief ’s absence , busy letting off fireworks on the staircase .
He touched off in quick succession a set of fierce rockets , angry catherine wheels , loudly exploding squibs — and the matter might have turned out very serious .
An awful panic spread through the whole building .
Wild-eyed , choking clerks stampeded through the passages full of smoke , silk hats and elderly business men could be seen rolling independently down the stairs .
Stevie did not seem to derive any personal gratification from what he had done .
His motives for this stroke of originality were difficult to discover .
It was only later on that Winnie obtained from him a misty and confused confession .
It seems that two other office-boys in the building had worked upon his feelings by tales of injustice and oppression till they had wrought his compassion to the pitch of that frenzy .
But his father ’s friend , of course , dismissed him summarily as likely to ruin his business .
After that altruistic exploit Stevie was put to help wash the dishes in the basement kitchen , and to black the boots of the gentlemen patronising the Belgravian mansion .
There was obviously no future in such work .
The gentlemen tipped him a shilling now and then .
Mr Verloc showed himself the most generous of lodgers .
But altogether all that did not amount to much either in the way of gain or prospects ; so that when Winnie announced her engagement to Mr Verloc her mother could not help wondering , with a sigh and a glance towards the scullery , what would become of poor Stephen now .
BOOK ONE CHAPTER I ANTHONY PATCH In 1913 , when Anthony Patch was twenty-five , two years were already gone since irony , the Holy Ghost of this later day , had , theoretically at least , descended upon him .
Irony was the final polish of the shoe , the ultimate dab of the clothes-brush , a sort of intellectual " There ! "
-- yet at the brink of this story he has as yet gone no further than the conscious stage .
As you first see him he wonders frequently whether he is not without honor and slightly mad , a shameful and obscene thinness glistening on the surface of the world like oil on a clean pond , these occasions being varied , of course , with those in which he thinks himself rather an exceptional young man , thoroughly sophisticated , well adjusted to his environment , and somewhat more significant than any one else he knows .
This was his healthy state and it made him cheerful , pleasant , and very attractive to intelligent men and to all women .
In this state he considered that he would one day accomplish some quiet subtle thing that the elect would deem worthy and , passing on , would join the dimmer stars in a nebulous , indeterminate heaven half-way between death and immortality .
Until the time came for this effort he would be Anthony Patch -- not a portrait of a man but a distinct and dynamic personality , opinionated , contemptuous , functioning from within outward -- a man who was aware that there could be no honor and yet had honor , who knew the sophistry of courage and yet was brave .
A WORTHY MAN AND HIS GIFTED SON Anthony drew as much consciousness of social security from being the grandson of Adam J. Patch as he would have had from tracing his line over the sea to the crusaders .
This is inevitable ; Virginians and Bostonians to the contrary notwithstanding , an aristocracy founded sheerly on money postulates wealth in the particular .
Now Adam J. Patch , more familiarly known as " Cross Patch , " left his father 's farm in Tarrytown early in sixty-one to join a New York cavalry regiment .
He came home from the war a major , charged into Wall Street , and amid much fuss , fume , applause , and ill will he gathered to himself some seventy-five million dollars .
This occupied his energies until he was fifty-seven years old .
It was then that he determined , after a severe attack of sclerosis , to consecrate the remainder of his life to the moral regeneration of the world .
He became a reformer among reformers .
Emulating the magnificent efforts of Anthony Comstock , after whom his grandson was named , he levelled a varied assortment of uppercuts and body-blows at liquor , literature , vice , art , patent medicines , and Sunday theatres .
His mind , under the influence of that insidious mildew which eventually forms on all but the few , gave itself up furiously to every indignation of the age .
From an armchair in the office of his Tarrytown estate he directed against the enormous hypothetical enemy , unrighteousness , a campaign which went on through fifteen years , during which he displayed himself a rabid monomaniac , an unqualified nuisance , and an intolerable bore .
The year in which this story opens found him wearying ; his campaign had grown desultory ; 1861 was creeping up slowly on 1895 ; his thoughts ran a great deal on the Civil War , somewhat on his dead wife and son , almost infinitesimally on his grandson Anthony .
Early in his career Adam Patch had married an anemic lady of thirty , Alicia Withers , who brought him one hundred thousand dollars and an impeccable entré into the banking circles of New York .
Immediately and rather spunkily she had borne him a son and , as if completely devitalized by the magnificence of this performance , she had thenceforth effaced herself within the shadowy dimensions of the nursery .
The boy , Adam Ulysses Patch , became an inveterate joiner of clubs , connoisseur of good form , and driver of tandems -- at the astonishing age of twenty-six he began his memoirs under the title " New York Society as I Have Seen It . "
On the rumor of its conception this work was eagerly bid for among publishers , but as it proved after his death to be immoderately verbose and overpoweringly dull , it never obtained even a private printing .
This Fifth Avenue Chesterfield married at twenty-two .
His wife was Henrietta Lebrune , the Boston " Society Contralto , " and the single child of the union was , at the request of his grandfather , christened Anthony Comstock Patch .
When he went to Harvard , the Comstock dropped out of his name to a nether hell of oblivion and was never heard of thereafter .
Young Anthony had one picture of his father and mother together -- so often had it faced his eyes in childhood that it had acquired the impersonality of furniture , but every one who came into his bedroom regarded it with interest .
It showed a dandy of the nineties , spare and handsome , standing beside a tall dark lady with a muff and the suggestion of a bustle .
Between them was a little boy with long brown curls , dressed in a velvet Lord Fauntleroy suit .
This was Anthony at five , the year of his mother 's death .
His memories of the Boston Society Contralto were nebulous and musical .
She was a lady who sang , sang , sang , in the music room of their house on Washington Square -- sometimes with guests scattered all about her , the men with their arms folded , balanced breathlessly on the edges of sofas , the women with their hands in their laps , occasionally making little whispers to the men and always clapping very briskly and uttering cooing cries after each song -- and often she sang to Anthony alone , in Italian or French or in a strange and terrible dialect which she imagined to be the speech of the Southern negro .
His recollections of the gallant Ulysses , the first man in America to roll the lapels of his coat , were much more vivid .
After Henrietta Lebrune Patch had " joined another choir , " as her widower huskily remarked from time to time , father and son lived up at grampa 's in Tarrytown , and Ulysses came daily to Anthony 's nursery and expelled pleasant , thick-smelling words for sometimes as much as an hour .
He was continually promising Anthony hunting trips and fishing trips and excursions to Atlantic City , " oh , some time soon now " ; but none of them ever materialized .
One trip they did take ; when Anthony was eleven they went abroad , to England and Switzerland , and there in the best hotel in Lucerne his father died with much sweating and grunting and crying aloud for air .
In a panic of despair and terror Anthony was brought back to America , wedded to a vague melancholy that was to stay beside him through the rest of his life .
PAST AND PERSON OF THE HERO At eleven he had a horror of death .
Within six impressionable years his parents had died and his grandmother had faded off almost imperceptibly , until , for the first time since her marriage , her person held for one day an unquestioned supremacy over her own drawing room .
So to Anthony life was a struggle against death , that waited at every corner .
It was as a concession to his hypochondriacal imagination that he formed the habit of reading in bed -- it soothed him .
He read until he was tired and often fell asleep with the lights still on .
His favorite diversion until he was fourteen was his stamp collection ; enormous , as nearly exhaustive as a boy 's could be -- his grandfather considered fatuously that it was teaching him geography .
So Anthony kept up a correspondence with a half dozen " Stamp and Coin " companies and it was rare that the mail failed to bring him new stamp-books or packages of glittering approval sheets -- there was a mysterious fascination in transferring his acquisitions interminably from one book to another .
His stamps were his greatest happiness and he bestowed impatient frowns on any one who interrupted him at play with them ; they devoured his allowance every month , and he lay awake at night musing untiringly on their variety and many-colored splendor .
At sixteen he had lived almost entirely within himself , an inarticulate boy , thoroughly un-American , and politely bewildered by his contemporaries .
The two preceding years had been spent in Europe with a private tutor , who persuaded him that Harvard was the thing ; it would " open doors , " it would be a tremendous tonic , it would give him innumerable self-sacrificing and devoted friends .
So he went to Harvard -- there was no other logical thing to be done with him .
Oblivious to the social system , he lived for a while alone and unsought in a high room in Beck Hall -- a slim dark boy of medium height with a shy sensitive mouth .
His allowance was more than liberal .
He laid the foundations for a library by purchasing from a wandering bibliophile first editions of Swinburne , Meredith , and Hardy , and a yellowed illegible autograph letter of Keats 's , finding later that he had been amazingly overcharged .
He became an exquisite dandy , amassed a rather pathetic collection of silk pajamas , brocaded dressing-gowns , and neckties too flamboyant to wear ; in this secret finery he would parade before a mirror in his room or lie stretched in satin along his window-seat looking down on the yard and realizing dimly this clamor , breathless and immediate , in which it seemed he was never to have a part .
Curiously enough he found in senior year that he had acquired a position in his class .
He learned that he was looked upon as a rather romantic figure , a scholar , a recluse , a tower of erudition .
This amused him but secretly pleased him -- he began going out , at first a little and then a great deal .
He made the Pudding .
He drank -- quietly and in the proper tradition .
It was said of him that had he not come to college so young he might have " done extremely well . "
In 1909 , when he graduated , he was only twenty years old .
Then abroad again -- to Rome this time , where he dallied with architecture and painting in turn , took up the violin , and wrote some ghastly Italian sonnets , supposedly the ruminations of a thirteenth-century monk on the joys of the contemplative life .
It became established among his Harvard intimates that he was in Rome , and those of them who were abroad that year looked him up and discovered with him , on many moonlight excursions , much in the city that was older than the Renaissance or indeed than the republic .
Maury Noble , from Philadelphia , for instance , remained two months , and together they realized the peculiar charm of Latin women and had a delightful sense of being very young and free in a civilization that was very old and free .
Not a few acquaintances of his grandfather 's called on him , and had he so desired he might have been _ persona grata _ with the diplomatic set -- indeed , he found that his inclinations tended more and more toward conviviality , but that long adolescent aloofness and consequent shyness still dictated to his conduct .
